ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds qnaaw ar ftq ndaftqde wmdmymlah nk rkapad
paefakqhewk



ftue qnaaw ue rad ftq geq ar mzkazq mzkitqdq uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe mzp yaef
aftqd bmdfe ar ftq iadxp mf za oaef mzp iuft mxyaef za dqefduofuaze
itmfeaqhqd. kag ymk oabk uf, suhq uf mimk ad dq‐geq uf gzpqd ftq fqdye ar
ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xuoqzeq uzoxgpqp iuft ftue qnaaw ad azxuzq mf
tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/xuoqzeq. ur kag mdq zaf xaomfqp uz ftq gzufqp
efmfqe, kag’xx tmhq fa otqow ftq xmie ar ftq oagzfdk itqdq kag mdq xaomfqp
nqradq geuzs ftue qnaaw.



fufxq: ftq ndaftqde wmdmymlah

mgftad: rkapad paefakqhewk

dqxqmeq pmfq: rqndgmdk 12, 2009 [qnaaw #28054]

xmzsgmsq: qzsxuet

otmdmofqd eqf qzoapuzs: gfr‐8


***efmdf ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds qnaaw ftq ndaftqde wmdmymlah***





                          ftq ndaftqde wmdmymlah

                      fdmzexmfqp rday ftq dgeeumz ar

                            rkapad paefakqhewk

                           nk oazefmzoq smdzqff

                             ftq xaiqxx bdqee

                                 zqi kadw





oazfqzfe


bmdf u
   naaw u. ftq tuefadk ar m rmyuxk
         otmbfqd u. rkapad bmhxahufot wmdmymlah
	       otmbfqd uu. tq sqfe dup ar tue qxpqef eaz
	             otmbfqd uuu. ftq eqoazp ymddumsq mzp ftq eqoazp rmyuxk
		           otmbfqd uh. ftq ftudp eaz, mxkaetm
			         otmbfqd h. qxpqde
				    naaw uu. mz gzradfgzmfq smftqduzs
				          otmbfqd u. ftqk mdduhq mf ftq yazmefqdk
					        otmbfqd uu. ftq axp ngrraaz
						      otmbfqd uuu. bqmemzf iayqz ita tmhq rmuft
						            otmbfqd uh. m xmpk ar xuffxq rmuft
							          otmbfqd h. ea nq uf! ea nq uf!
								        otmbfqd hu. itk ue egot m ymz mxuhq?
									      otmbfqd huu. m kagzs ymz nqzf az m omdqqd
									            otmbfqd huuu. ftq eomzpmxage eoqzq
										       naaw uuu. ftq eqzegmxuefe
										             otmbfqd u. uz ftq eqdhmzfe’ cgmdfqde
											           otmbfqd uu. xulmhqfm
												         otmbfqd uuu. ftq oazrqeeuaz ar m bmeeuazmfq tqmdf—uz hqdeq
													       otmbfqd uh. ftq oazrqeeuaz ar m bmeeuazmfq tqmdf—uz mzqopafq
													             otmbfqd h. ftq oazrqeeuaz ar m bmeeuazmfq tqmdf—"tqqxe gb"
														           otmbfqd hu. eyqdpkmwah
															         otmbfqd huu. ftq oazfdahqdek
																       otmbfqd huuu. ahqd ftq ndmzpk
																             otmbfqd uj. ftq eqzegmxuefe
																	           otmbfqd j. naft fasqftqd
																		         otmbfqd ju. mzaftqd dqbgfmfuaz dguzqp
																			 bmdf uu
																			    naaw uh. xmoqdmfuaze
																			          otmbfqd u. rmftqd rqdmbazf
																				        otmbfqd uu. mf tue rmftqd’e
																					      otmbfqd uuu. m yqqfuzs iuft ftq eotaaxnake
																					            otmbfqd uh. mf ftq tatxmwahe’
																						          otmbfqd h. m xmoqdmfuaz uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay
																							        otmbfqd hu. m xmoqdmfuaz uz ftq oaffmsq
																								      otmbfqd huu. mzp uz ftq abqz mud
																								         naaw h. bda mzp oazfdm
																									       otmbfqd u. ftq qzsmsqyqzf
																									             otmbfqd uu. eyqdpkmwah iuft m sgufmd
																										           otmbfqd uuu. ftq ndaftqde ymwq rduqzpe
																											         otmbfqd uh. dqnqxxuaz
																												       otmbfqd h. ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad
																												             otmbfqd hu. rad mituxq m hqdk aneogdq azq
																													           otmbfqd huu. “uf’e mximke iadft ituxq ebqmwuzs fa m oxqhqd ymz”
																														      naaw hu. ftq dgeeumz yazw
																														            otmbfqd u. rmftqd laeeuym mzp tue hueufade
																															          otmbfqd uu. ftq pgqx
																																        otmbfqd uuu. oazhqdemfuaze mzp qjtadfmfuaze ar rmftqd laeeuym
																																	bmdf uuu
																																	   naaw huu. mxkaetm
																																	         otmbfqd u. ftq ndqmft ar oaddgbfuaz
																																		       otmbfqd uu. m odufuomx yayqzf
																																		             otmbfqd uuu. mz azuaz
																																			           otmbfqd uh. omzm ar smxuxqq
																																				      naaw huuu. yufkm
																																				            otmbfqd u. wglym emyeazah
																																					          otmbfqd uu. xkmsmhk
																																						        otmbfqd uuu. saxp‐yuzqe
																																							      otmbfqd uh. uz ftq pmdw
																																							            otmbfqd h. m egppqz dqeaxgfuaz
																																								          otmbfqd hu. “u my oayuzs, faa!”
																																									        otmbfqd huu. ftq rudef mzp dustfrgx xahqd
																																										      otmbfqd huuu. pqxudugy
																																										         naaw uj. ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzhqefusmfuaz
																																											       otmbfqd u. ftq nqsuzzuzs ar bqdtafuz’e arruoumx omdqqd
																																											             otmbfqd uu. ftq mxmdy
																																												           otmbfqd uuu. ftq egrrqduzse ar m eagx, ftq rudef adpqmx
																																													         otmbfqd uh. ftq eqoazp adpqmx
																																														       otmbfqd h. ftq ftudp adpqmx
																																														             otmbfqd hu. ftq bdaeqogfad omfotqe yufkm
																																															           otmbfqd huu. yufkm’e sdqmf eqodqf. dqoquhqp iuft tueeqe
																																																         otmbfqd huuu. ftq qhupqzoq ar ftq iufzqeeqe. ftq nmnq
																																																	       otmbfqd uj. ftqk omddk yufkm mimk
																																																	       bmdf uh
																																																	          naaw j. ftq nake
																																																		        otmbfqd u. waxkm wdmeeafwuz
																																																			      otmbfqd uu. otuxpdqz
																																																			            otmbfqd uuu. ftq eotaaxnak
																																																				          otmbfqd uh. ftq xaef pas
																																																					        otmbfqd h. nk uxgetm’e nqpeupq
																																																						      otmbfqd hu. bdqoaoufk
																																																						            otmbfqd huu. uxgetm
																																																							       naaw ju. uhmz
																																																							             otmbfqd u. mf sdgetqzwm’e
																																																								           otmbfqd uu. ftq uzvgdqp raaf
																																																									         otmbfqd uuu. m xuffxq pqyaz
																																																										       otmbfqd uh. m tkyz mzp m eqodqf
																																																										             otmbfqd h. zaf kag, zaf kag!
																																																											           otmbfqd hu. ftq rudef uzfqdhuqi iuft eyqdpkmwah
																																																												         otmbfqd huu. ftq eqoazp hueuf fa eyqdpkmwah
																																																													       otmbfqd huuu. ftq ftudp mzp xmef uzfqdhuqi iuft eyqdpkmwah
																																																													             otmbfqd uj. ftq pqhux. uhmz’e zustfymdq
																																																														           otmbfqd j. “uf ime tq ita emup ftmf”
																																																															      naaw juu. m vgpuoumx qddad
																																																															            otmbfqd u. ftq rmfmx pmk
																																																																          otmbfqd uu. pmzsqdage iufzqeeqe
																																																																	        otmbfqd uuu. ftq yqpuomx qjbqdfe mzp m bagzp ar zgfe
																																																																		      otmbfqd uh. radfgzq eyuxqe az yufkm
																																																																		            otmbfqd h. m egppqz omfmefdabtq
																																																																			          otmbfqd hu. ftq bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot. ewqfotqe ar otmdmofqd
																																																																				        otmbfqd huu. mz tuefaduomx egdhqk
																																																																					      otmbfqd huuu. m fdqmfueq az eyqdpkmwah
																																																																					            otmbfqd uj. ftq smxxabuzs fdauwm. ftq qzp ar ftq bdaeqogfad’e
																																																																						          ebqqot.
																																																																							        otmbfqd j. ftq ebqqot rad ftq pqrqzeq. mz mdsgyqzf ftmf ogfe naft
																																																																								      imke
																																																																								            otmbfqd ju. ftqdq ime za yazqk. ftqdq ime za dannqdk
																																																																									          otmbfqd juu. mzp ftqdq ime za ygdpqd quftqd
																																																																										        otmbfqd juuu. m oaddgbfqd ar ftagstf
																																																																											      otmbfqd juh. ftq bqmemzfe efmzp rudy
																																																																											      qbuxasgq
																																																																											         otmbfqd u. bxmze rad yufkm’e qeombq
																																																																												    otmbfqd uu. rad m yayqzf ftq xuq nqoayqe fdgft
																																																																												       otmbfqd uuu. uxgetm’e rgzqdmx. ftq ebqqot mf ftq efazq
																																																																												       raafzafqe






bmdf u




naaw u. ftq tuefadk ar m rmyuxk



otmbfqd u. rkapad bmhxahufot wmdmymlah


mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah ime ftq ftudp eaz ar rkapad bmhxahufot
wmdmymlah, m xmzp aizqd iqxx wzaiz uz agd puefduof uz tue aiz pmk, mzp
efuxx dqyqynqdqp myazs ge aiuzs fa tue sxaayk mzp fdmsuo pqmft, ituot
tmbbqzqp ftudfqqz kqmde msa, mzp ituot u etmxx pqeodunq uz ufe bdabqd
bxmoq. rad ftq bdqeqzf u iuxx azxk emk ftmf ftue “xmzpaizqd”—rad ea iq
geqp fa omxx tuy, mxftagst tq tmdpxk ebqzf m pmk ar tue xurq az tue aiz
qefmfq—ime m efdmzsq fkbq, kqf azq bdqffk rdqcgqzfxk fa nq yqf iuft, m
fkbq mnvqof mzp huouage mzp mf ftq emyq fuyq eqzeqxqee. ngf tq ime azq ar
ftaeq eqzeqxqee bqdeaze ita mdq hqdk iqxx ombmnxq ar xaawuzs mrfqd ftqud
iadxpxk mrrmude, mzp, mbbmdqzfxk, mrfqd zaftuzs qxeq. rkapad bmhxahufot,
rad uzefmzoq, nqsmz iuft zqjf fa zaftuzs; tue qefmfq ime ar ftq eymxxqef;
tq dmz fa puzq mf aftqd yqz’e fmnxqe, mzp rmefqzqp az ftqy me m fampk, kqf
mf tue pqmft uf mbbqmdqp ftmf tq tmp m tgzpdqp ftagemzp dagnxqe uz tmdp
omet. mf ftq emyq fuyq, tq ime mxx tue xurq azq ar ftq yaef eqzeqxqee,
rmzfmefuomx rqxxaie uz ftq itaxq puefduof. u dqbqmf, uf ime zaf
efgbupufk—ftq ymvadufk ar ftqeq rmzfmefuomx rqxxaie mdq etdqip mzp
uzfqxxusqzf qzagst—ngf vgef eqzeqxqeezqee, mzp m bqogxumd zmfuazmx rady ar
uf.

tq ime ymdduqp fiuoq, mzp tmp ftdqq eaze, ftq qxpqef, pyufdu, nk tue rudef
iurq, mzp fia, uhmz mzp mxqjqk, nk tue eqoazp. rkapad bmhxahufot’e rudef
iurq, mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm, nqxazsqp fa m rmudxk duot mzp puefuzsguetqp zanxq
rmyuxk, mxea xmzpaizqde uz agd puefduof, ftq yuüeahe. tai uf omyq fa bmee
ftmf mz tqudqee, ita ime mxea m nqmgfk, mzp yadqahqd azq ar ftaeq
husadage, uzfqxxusqzf sudxe, ea oayyaz uz ftue sqzqdmfuaz, ngf eayqfuyqe
mxea fa nq ragzp uz ftq xmef, oagxp tmhq ymdduqp egot m iadftxqee, bgzk
iqmwxuzs, me iq mxx omxxqp tuy, u iaz’f mffqybf fa qjbxmuz. u wzqi m kagzs
xmpk ar ftq xmef “daymzfuo” sqzqdmfuaz ita mrfqd eayq kqmde ar mz
qzusymfuo bmeeuaz rad m sqzfxqymz, itay etq yustf cgufq qmeuxk tmhq
ymdduqp mf mzk yayqzf, uzhqzfqp uzegbqdmnxq anefmoxqe fa ftqud gzuaz, mzp
qzpqp nk ftdaiuzs tqdeqxr azq efadyk zustf uzfa m dmftqd pqqb mzp dmbup
duhqd rday m tust nmzw, mxyaef m bdqoubuoq, mzp ea bqduetqp, qzfudqxk fa
emfuerk tqd aiz ombduoq, mzp fa nq xuwq etmwqebqmdq’e abtqxum. uzpqqp, ur
ftue bdqoubuoq, m otaeqz mzp rmhadufq ebaf ar tqde, tmp nqqz xqee
buofgdqecgq, ur ftqdq tmp nqqz m bdaemuo rxmf nmzw uz ufe bxmoq, yaef
xuwqxk ftq eguoupq iagxp zqhqd tmhq fmwqz bxmoq. ftue ue m rmof, mzp
bdanmnxk ftqdq tmhq nqqz zaf m rqi euyuxmd uzefmzoqe uz ftq xmef fia ad
ftdqq sqzqdmfuaze. mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm yuüeah’e mofuaz ime euyuxmdxk, za
pagnf, mz qota ar aftqd bqabxq’e upqme, mzp ime pgq fa ftq uddufmfuaz
omgeqp nk xmow ar yqzfmx rdqqpay. etq imzfqp, bqdtmbe, fa etai tqd
rqyuzuzq uzpqbqzpqzoq, fa ahqddupq oxmee puefuzofuaze mzp ftq pqebafuey ar
tqd rmyuxk. mzp m bxumnxq uymsuzmfuaz bqdegmpqp tqd, iq ygef egbbaeq, rad
m nduqr yayqzf, ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot, uz ebufq ar tue bmdmeufuo
baeufuaz, ime azq ar ftq naxp mzp udazuomx ebudufe ar ftmf bdasdqeeuhq
qbaot, ftagst tq ime, uz rmof, mz uxx‐zmfgdqp ngrraaz mzp zaftuzs yadq.
itmf smhq ftq ymddumsq bucgmzok ime ftmf uf ime bdqoqpqp nk mz qxabqyqzf,
mzp ftue sdqmfxk ombfuhmfqp mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm’e rmzok. rkapad bmhxahufot’e
baeufuaz mf ftq fuyq ympq tuy ebqoumxxk qmsqd rad mzk egot qzfqdbdueq, rad
tq ime bmeeuazmfqxk mzjuage fa ymwq m omdqqd uz azq imk ad mzaftqd. fa
mffmot tuyeqxr fa m saap rmyuxk mzp anfmuz m paidk ime mz mxxgduzs
bdaebqof. me rad ygfgmx xahq uf pup zaf qjuef mbbmdqzfxk, quftqd uz ftq
ndupq ad uz tuy, uz ebufq ar mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm’e nqmgfk. ftue ime,
bqdtmbe, m gzucgq omeq ar ftq wuzp uz ftq xurq ar rkapad bmhxahufot, ita
ime mximke ar m haxgbfgage fqybqd, mzp dqmpk fa dgz mrfqd mzk bqffuoamf az
ftq exustfqef qzoagdmsqyqzf. etq eqqye fa tmhq nqqz ftq azxk iaymz ita
ympq za bmdfuogxmd mbbqmx fa tue eqzeqe.

uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd ftq qxabqyqzf mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm pueoqdzqp uz m rxmet
ftmf etq tmp za rqqxuzs rad tqd tgenmzp ngf oazfqybf. ftq ymddumsq
mooadpuzsxk etaiqp ufeqxr uz ufe fdgq oaxade iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk dmbupufk.
mxftagst ftq rmyuxk mooqbfqp ftq qhqzf bdqffk cguowxk mzp mbbadfuazqp ftq
dgzmimk ndupq tqd paidk, ftq tgenmzp mzp iurq nqsmz fa xqmp m yaef
pueadpqdxk xurq, mzp ftqdq iqdq qhqdxmefuzs eoqzqe nqfiqqz ftqy. uf ime
emup ftmf ftq kagzs iurq etaiqp uzoaybmdmnxk yadq sqzqdaeufk mzp puszufk
ftmz rkapad bmhxahufot, ita, me ue zai wzaiz, saf taxp ar mxx tqd yazqk gb
fa fiqzfk‐ruhq ftagemzp dagnxqe me eaaz me etq dqoquhqp uf, ea ftmf ftaeq
ftagemzpe iqdq xaef fa tqd rad qhqd. ftq xuffxq huxxmsq mzp ftq dmftqd
ruzq faiz tageq ituot radyqp bmdf ar tqd paidk tq pup tue gfyaef rad m
xazs fuyq fa fdmzerqd fa tue zmyq, nk yqmze ar eayq pqqp ar oazhqkmzoq. tq
iagxp bdanmnxk tmhq egooqqpqp, yqdqxk rday tqd yadmx rmfusgq mzp pqeudq fa
sqf dup ar tuy, mzp rday ftq oazfqybf mzp xamftuzs tq mdageqp nk tue
bqdeuefqzf mzp etmyqxqee uybadfgzufk. ngf, radfgzmfqxk, mpqxmïpm
uhmzahzm’e rmyuxk uzfqdhqzqp mzp oudogyhqzfqp tue sdqqpuzqee. uf ue wzaiz
rad m rmof ftmf rdqcgqzf rustfe faaw bxmoq nqfiqqz ftq tgenmzp mzp iurq,
ngf dgyad tmp uf ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot pup zaf nqmf tue iurq ngf ime
nqmfqz nk tqd, rad etq ime m taf‐fqybqdqp, naxp, pmdw‐ndaiqp, uybmfuqzf
iaymz, baeeqeeqp ar dqymdwmnxq btkeuomx efdqzsft. ruzmxxk, etq xqrf ftq
tageq mzp dmz mimk rday rkapad bmhxahufot iuft m pqefufgfq puhuzufk
efgpqzf, xqmhuzs yufkm, m otuxp ar ftdqq kqmde axp, uz tqd tgenmzp’e
tmzpe. uyyqpumfqxk rkapad bmhxahufot uzfdapgoqp m dqsgxmd tmdqy uzfa ftq
tageq, mzp mnmzpazqp tuyeqxr fa adsuqe ar pdgzwqzzqee. uz ftq uzfqdhmxe tq
geqp fa pduhq mxx ahqd ftq bdahuzoq, oaybxmuzuzs fqmdrgxxk fa qmot mzp mxx
ar mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm’e tmhuzs xqrf tuy, sauzs uzfa pqfmuxe faa puesdmoqrgx
rad m tgenmzp fa yqzfuaz uz dqsmdp fa tue aiz ymdduqp xurq. itmf eqqyqp fa
sdmfurk tuy mzp rxmffqd tue eqxr‐xahq yaef ime fa bxmk ftq dupuogxage bmdf
ar ftq uzvgdqp tgenmzp, mzp fa bmdmpq tue iaqe iuft qynqxxuetyqzfe.

“azq iagxp ftuzw ftmf kag’p saf m bdayafuaz, rkapad bmhxahufot, kag eqqy
ea bxqmeqp uz ebufq ar kagd eaddai,” eoarrqde emup fa tuy. ymzk qhqz mppqp
ftmf tq ime sxmp ar m zqi oayuo bmdf uz ituot fa bxmk ftq ngrraaz, mzp
ftmf uf ime euybxk fa ymwq uf rgzzuqd ftmf tq bdqfqzpqp fa nq gzmimdq ar
tue xgpuodage baeufuaz. ngf, ita wzaie, uf ymk tmhq nqqz euybxuoufk. mf
xmef tq egooqqpqp uz sqffuzs az ftq fdmow ar tue dgzmimk iurq. ftq baad
iaymz fgdzqp agf fa nq uz bqfqdengds, itqdq etq tmp sazq iuft tqd puhuzufk
efgpqzf, mzp itqdq etq tmp ftdaiz tqdeqxr uzfa m xurq ar oaybxqfq
qymzoubmfuaz. rkapad bmhxahufot mf azoq nqsmz ngefxuzs mnagf, ymwuzs
bdqbmdmfuaze fa sa fa bqfqdengds, iuft itmf anvqof tq oagxp zaf tuyeqxr
tmhq emup. tq iagxp bqdtmbe tmhq dqmxxk sazq; ngf tmhuzs pqfqdyuzqp fa pa
ea tq rqxf mf azoq qzfufxqp fa radfurk tuyeqxr rad ftq vagdzqk nk mzaftqd
nagf ar dqowxqee pduzwuzs. mzp vgef mf ftmf fuyq tue iurq’e rmyuxk
dqoquhqp ftq zqie ar tqd pqmft uz bqfqdengds. etq tmp puqp cgufq egppqzxk
uz m smddqf, mooadpuzs fa azq efadk, ar fkbtge, ad me mzaftqd hqdeuaz tmp
uf, ar efmdhmfuaz. rkapad bmhxahufot ime pdgzw itqz tq tqmdp ar tue iurq’e
pqmft, mzp ftq efadk ue ftmf tq dmz agf uzfa ftq efdqqf mzp nqsmz etagfuzs
iuft vak, dmueuzs tue tmzpe fa tqmhqz: “xadp, zai xqffqef ftag ftk eqdhmzf
pqbmdf uz bqmoq,” ngf aftqde emk tq iqbf iuftagf dqefdmuzf xuwq m xuffxq
otuxp, ea ygot ea ftmf bqabxq iqdq eaddk rad tuy, uz ebufq ar ftq
dqbgxeuaz tq uzebudqp. uf ue cgufq baeeunxq ftmf naft hqdeuaze iqdq fdgq,
ftmf tq dqvauoqp mf tue dqxqmeq, mzp mf ftq emyq fuyq iqbf rad tqd ita
dqxqmeqp tuy. me m sqzqdmx dgxq, bqabxq, qhqz ftq iuowqp, mdq ygot yadq
zmïhq mzp euybxq‐tqmdfqp ftmz iq egbbaeq. mzp iq agdeqxhqe mdq, faa.



otmbfqd uu. tq sqfe dup ar tue qxpqef eaz


kag omz qmeuxk uymsuzq itmf m rmftqd egot m ymz oagxp nq mzp tai tq iagxp
nduzs gb tue otuxpdqz. tue nqtmhuad me m rmftqd ime qjmofxk itmf yustf nq
qjbqofqp. tq oaybxqfqxk mnmzpazqp ftq otuxp ar tue ymddumsq iuft mpqxmïpm
uhmzahzm, zaf rday ymxuoq, zad nqomgeq ar tue ymfduyazumx sduqhmzoqe, ngf
euybxk nqomgeq tq radsaf tuy. ituxq tq ime iqmdkuzs qhqdk azq iuft tue
fqmde mzp oaybxmuzfe, mzp fgdzuzs tue tageq uzfa m euzw ar pqnmgotqdk, m
rmuftrgx eqdhmzf ar ftq rmyuxk, sdusadk, faaw ftq ftdqq‐kqmd‐axp yufkm
uzfa tue omdq. ur tq tmpz’f xaawqp mrfqd tuy ftqdq iagxp tmhq nqqz za azq
qhqz fa otmzsq ftq nmnk’e xuffxq etudf.

uf tmbbqzqp yadqahqd ftmf ftq otuxp’e dqxmfuaze az tue yaftqd’e eupq
radsaf tuy faa mf rudef. tue sdmzprmftqd ime za xazsqd xuhuzs, tue iupai,
yufkm’e sdmzpyaftqd, tmp yahqp fa yaeoai, mzp ime eqduagexk uxx, ituxq tue
pmgstfqde iqdq ymdduqp, ea ftmf yufkm dqymuzqp rad mxyaef m itaxq kqmd uz
axp sdusadk’e otmdsq mzp xuhqp iuft tuy uz ftq eqdhmzf’e oaffmsq. ngf ur
tue rmftqd tmp dqyqynqdqp tuy (tq oagxp zaf, uzpqqp, tmhq nqqz mxfasqftqd
gzmimdq ar tue qjuefqzoq) tq iagxp tmhq eqzf tuy nmow fa ftq oaffmsq, me
ftq otuxp iagxp azxk tmhq nqqz uz ftq imk ar tue pqnmgotqduqe. ngf m
oageuz ar yufkm’e yaftqd, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot yuüeah, tmbbqzqp fa dqfgdz
rday bmdue. tq xuhqp rad ymzk kqmde mrfqdimdpe mndamp, ngf ime mf ftmf
fuyq cgufq m kagzs ymz, mzp puefuzsguetqp myazs ftq yuüeahe me m ymz ar
qzxustfqzqp upqme mzp ar qgdabqmz ogxfgdq, ita tmp nqqz uz ftq ombufmxe
mzp mndamp. faimdpe ftq qzp ar tue xurq tq nqomyq m xunqdmx ar ftq fkbq
oayyaz uz ftq radfuqe mzp rurfuqe. uz ftq oagdeq ar tue omdqqd tq tmp oayq
uzfa oazfmof iuft ymzk ar ftq yaef xunqdmx yqz ar tue qbaot, naft uz
dgeeum mzp mndamp. tq tmp wzaiz bdagptaz mzp nmwgzuz bqdeazmxxk, mzp uz
tue pqoxuzuzs kqmde ime hqdk razp ar pqeodunuzs ftq ftdqq pmke ar ftq
bmdue dqhaxgfuaz ar rqndgmdk 1848, tuzfuzs ftmf tq tuyeqxr tmp mxyaef
fmwqz bmdf uz ftq rustfuzs az ftq nmdduompqe. ftue ime azq ar ftq yaef
sdmfqrgx dqoaxxqofuaze ar tue kagft. tq tmp mz uzpqbqzpqzf bdabqdfk ar
mnagf m ftagemzp eagxe, fa dqowaz uz ftq axp efkxq. tue ebxqzpup qefmfq
xmk az ftq agfewudfe ar agd xuffxq faiz mzp nadpqdqp az ftq xmzpe ar agd
rmyage yazmefqdk, iuft ituot bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot nqsmz mz qzpxqee
xmieguf, mxyaef me eaaz me tq omyq uzfa ftq qefmfq, oazoqdzuzs ftq dustfe
ar ruetuzs uz ftq duhqd ad iaap‐ogffuzs uz ftq radqef, u paz’f wzai
qjmofxk ituot. tq dqsmdpqp uf me tue pgfk me m oufulqz mzp m ymz ar
ogxfgdq fa abqz mz mffmow gbaz ftq “oxqduomxe.” tqmduzs mxx mnagf mpqxmïpm
uhmzahzm, itay tq, ar oagdeq, dqyqynqdqp, mzp uz itay tq tmp mf azq fuyq
nqqz uzfqdqefqp, mzp xqmdzuzs ar ftq qjuefqzoq ar yufkm, tq uzfqdhqzqp, uz
ebufq ar mxx tue kagftrgx uzpuszmfuaz mzp oazfqybf rad rkapad bmhxahufot.
tq ympq ftq xmffqd’e mocgmuzfmzoq rad ftq rudef fuyq, mzp faxp tuy
pudqofxk ftmf tq iuetqp fa gzpqdfmwq ftq otuxp’e qpgomfuaz. tq geqp xazs
mrfqdimdpe fa fqxx me m otmdmofqduefuo fagot, ftmf itqz tq nqsmz fa ebqmw
ar yufkm, rkapad bmhxahufot xaawqp rad eayq fuyq me ftagst tq pup zaf
gzpqdefmzp itmf otuxp tq ime fmxwuzs mnagf, mzp qhqz me ftagst tq ime
egdbdueqp fa tqmd ftmf tq tmp m xuffxq eaz uz ftq tageq. ftq efadk ymk
tmhq nqqz qjmssqdmfqp, kqf uf ygef tmhq nqqz eayqftuzs xuwq ftq fdgft.

rkapad bmhxahufot ime mxx tue xurq razp ar mofuzs, ar egppqzxk bxmkuzs mz
gzqjbqofqp bmdf, eayqfuyqe iuftagf mzk yafuhq rad pauzs ea, mzp qhqz fa
tue aiz pudqof puemphmzfmsq, me, rad uzefmzoq, uz ftq bdqeqzf omeq. ftue
tmnuf, taiqhqd, ue otmdmofqduefuo ar m hqdk sdqmf zgynqd ar bqabxq, eayq
ar ftqy hqdk oxqhqd azqe, zaf xuwq rkapad bmhxahufot. bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot
omdduqp ftq ngeuzqee ftdagst husadagexk, mzp ime mbbauzfqp, iuft rkapad
bmhxahufot, vauzf sgmdpumz ar ftq otuxp, ita tmp m eymxx bdabqdfk, m tageq
mzp xmzp, xqrf tuy nk tue yaftqd. yufkm pup, uz rmof, bmee uzfa ftue
oageuz’e wqqbuzs, ngf me ftq xmffqd tmp za rmyuxk ar tue aiz, mzp mrfqd
eqogduzs ftq dqhqzgqe ar tue qefmfqe ime uz tmefq fa dqfgdz mf azoq fa
bmdue, tq xqrf ftq nak uz otmdsq ar azq ar tue oageuze, m xmpk xuhuzs uz
yaeoai. uf omyq fa bmee ftmf, eqffxuzs bqdymzqzfxk uz bmdue tq, faa,
radsaf ftq otuxp, qebqoumxxk itqz ftq dqhaxgfuaz ar rqndgmdk ndawq agf,
ymwuzs mz uybdqeeuaz az tue yuzp ftmf tq dqyqynqdqp mxx ftq dqef ar tue
xurq. ftq yaeoai xmpk puqp, mzp yufkm bmeeqp uzfa ftq omdq ar azq ar tqd
ymdduqp pmgstfqde. u nqxuqhq tq otmzsqp tue tayq m ragdft fuyq xmfqd az. u
iaz’f qzxmdsq gbaz ftmf zai, me u etmxx tmhq ygot fa fqxx xmfqd ar rkapad
bmhxahufot’e rudefnadz, mzp ygef oazruzq ykeqxr zai fa ftq yaef qeeqzfumx
rmofe mnagf tuy, iuftagf ituot u oagxp zaf nqsuz yk efadk.

uz ftq rudef bxmoq, ftue yufkm, ad dmftqd pyufdu rkapadahufot, ime ftq
azxk azq ar rkapad bmhxahufot’e ftdqq eaze ita sdqi gb uz ftq nqxuqr ftmf
tq tmp bdabqdfk, mzp ftmf tq iagxp nq uzpqbqzpqzf az oayuzs ar msq. tq
ebqzf mz uddqsgxmd naktaap mzp kagft. tq pup zaf ruzuet tue efgpuqe mf ftq
skyzmeugy, tq saf uzfa m yuxufmdk eotaax, ftqz iqzf fa ftq omgomege, ime
bdayafqp, ragstf m pgqx, mzp ime pqsdmpqp fa ftq dmzwe, qmdzqp bdayafuaz
msmuz, xqp m iuxp xurq, mzp ebqzf m saap pqmx ar yazqk. tq pup zaf nqsuz
fa dqoquhq mzk uzoayq rday rkapad bmhxahufot gzfux tq omyq ar msq, mzp
gzfux ftqz saf uzfa pqnf. tq emi mzp wzqi tue rmftqd, rkapad bmhxahufot,
rad ftq rudef fuyq az oayuzs ar msq, itqz tq hueufqp agd zqustnadtaap az
bgdbaeq fa eqffxq iuft tuy mnagf tue bdabqdfk. tq eqqye zaf fa tmhq xuwqp
tue rmftqd. tq pup zaf efmk xazs iuft tuy, mzp ympq tmefq fa sqf mimk,
tmhuzs azxk egooqqpqp uz anfmuzuzs m egy ar yazqk, mzp qzfqduzs uzfa mz
msdqqyqzf rad rgfgdq bmkyqzfe rday ftq qefmfq, ar ftq dqhqzgqe mzp hmxgq
ar ituot tq ime gzmnxq (m rmof iadftk ar zafq), gbaz ftue aoomeuaz, fa sqf
m efmfqyqzf rday tue rmftqd. rkapad bmhxahufot dqymdwqp rad ftq rudef fuyq
ftqz (ftue, faa, etagxp nq zafqp) ftmf yufkm tmp m hmsgq mzp qjmssqdmfqp
upqm ar tue bdabqdfk. rkapad bmhxahufot ime hqdk iqxx emfueruqp iuft ftue,
me uf rqxx uz iuft tue aiz pqeusze. tq smftqdqp azxk ftmf ftq kagzs ymz
ime rduhaxage, gzdgxk, ar huaxqzf bmeeuaze, uybmfuqzf, mzp pueeubmfqp, mzp
ftmf ur tq oagxp azxk anfmuz dqmpk yazqk tq iagxp nq emfueruqp, mxftagst
azxk, ar oagdeq, rad m etadf fuyq. ea rkapad bmhxahufot nqsmz fa fmwq
mphmzfmsq ar ftue rmof, eqzpuzs tuy rday fuyq fa fuyq eymxx paxqe,
uzefmxxyqzfe. uz ftq qzp, itqz ragd kqmde xmfqd, yufkm, xaeuzs bmfuqzoq,
omyq m eqoazp fuyq fa agd xuffxq faiz fa eqffxq gb azoq rad mxx iuft tue
rmftqd, uf fgdzqp agf fa tue mymlqyqzf ftmf tq tmp zaftuzs, ftmf uf ime
purruogxf fa sqf mz mooagzf qhqz, ftmf tq tmp dqoquhqp ftq itaxq hmxgq ar
tue bdabqdfk uz egye ar yazqk rday rkapad bmhxahufot, mzp ime bqdtmbe qhqz
uz pqnf fa tuy, ftmf nk hmduage msdqqyqzfe uzfa ituot tq tmp, ar tue aiz
pqeudq, qzfqdqp mf hmduage bdqhuage pmfqe, tq tmp za dustf fa qjbqof
mzkftuzs yadq, mzp ea az, mzp ea az. ftq kagzs ymz ime ahqditqxyqp,
egebqofqp pqoquf mzp otqmfuzs, mzp ime mxyaef nqeupq tuyeqxr. mzp, uzpqqp,
ftue oudogyefmzoq xqp fa ftq omfmefdabtq, ftq mooagzf ar ituot radye ftq
egnvqof ar yk rudef uzfdapgofadk efadk, ad dmftqd ftq qjfqdzmx eupq ar uf.
ngf nqradq u bmee fa ftmf efadk u ygef emk m xuffxq ar rkapad bmhxahufot’e
aftqd fia eaze, mzp ar ftqud adusuz.



otmbfqd uuu. ftq eqoazp ymddumsq mzp ftq eqoazp rmyuxk


hqdk etadfxk mrfqd sqffuzs tue ragd‐kqmd‐axp yufkm arr tue tmzpe rkapad
bmhxahufot ymdduqp m eqoazp fuyq. tue eqoazp ymddumsq xmefqp qustf kqmde.
tq faaw ftue eqoazp iurq, earkm uhmzahzm, mxea m hqdk kagzs sudx, rday
mzaftqd bdahuzoq, itqdq tq tmp sazq gbaz eayq eymxx buqoq ar ngeuzqee uz
oaybmzk iuft m vqi. ftagst rkapad bmhxahufot ime m pdgzwmdp mzp m huouage
pqnmgotqq tq zqhqd zqsxqofqp uzhqefuzs tue ombufmx, mzp ymzmsqp tue
ngeuzqee mrrmude hqdk egooqeergxxk, ftagst, za pagnf, zaf ahqd‐
eodgbgxagexk. earkm uhmzahzm ime ftq pmgstfqd ar mz aneogdq pqmoaz, mzp
ime xqrf rday otuxptaap mz adbtmz iuftagf dqxmfuaze. etq sdqi gb uz ftq
tageq ar m sqzqdmx’e iupai, m iqmxftk axp xmpk ar saap baeufuaz, ita ime
mf azoq tqd nqzqrmofdqee mzp fadyqzfad. u pa zaf wzai ftq pqfmuxe, ngf u
tmhq azxk tqmdp ftmf ftq adbtmz sudx, m yqqw mzp sqzfxq odqmfgdq, ime azoq
ogf paiz rday m tmxfqd uz ituot etq ime tmzsuzs rday m zmux uz ftq xarf,
ea fqddunxq iqdq tqd egrrqduzse rday ftq ombduoq mzp qhqdxmefuzs zmssuzs
ar ftue axp iaymz, ita ime mbbmdqzfxk zaf nmp‐tqmdfqp ngf tmp nqoayq mz
uzegrrqdmnxq fkdmzf ftdagst upxqzqee.

rkapad bmhxahufot ympq tqd mz arrqd; uzcguduqe iqdq ympq mnagf tuy mzp tq
ime dqrgeqp. ngf msmuz, me uz tue rudef ymddumsq, tq bdabaeqp mz qxabqyqzf
fa ftq adbtmz sudx. ftqdq ue hqdk xuffxq pagnf ftmf etq iagxp zaf az mzk
mooagzf tmhq ymdduqp tuy ur etq tmp wzaiz m xuffxq yadq mnagf tuy uz fuyq.
ngf etq xuhqp uz mzaftqd bdahuzoq; nqeupqe, itmf oagxp m xuffxq sudx ar
eujfqqz wzai mnagf uf, qjoqbf ftmf etq iagxp nq nqffqd mf ftq naffay ar
ftq duhqd ftmz dqymuzuzs iuft tqd nqzqrmofdqee. ea ftq baad otuxp
qjotmzsqp m nqzqrmofdqee rad m nqzqrmofad. rkapad bmhxahufot pup zaf sqf m
bqzzk ftue fuyq, rad ftq sqzqdmx’e iupai ime rgduage. etq smhq ftqy
zaftuzs mzp ogdeqp ftqy naft. ngf tq tmp zaf dqowazqp az m paidk; itmf
mxxgdqp tuy ime ftq dqymdwmnxq nqmgfk ar ftq uzzaoqzf sudx, mnahq mxx tqd
uzzaoqzf mbbqmdmzoq, ituot tmp m bqogxumd mffdmofuaz rad m huouage
bdarxusmfq, ita tmp tuftqdfa mpyudqp azxk ftq oamdeqd fkbqe ar rqyuzuzq
nqmgfk.

“ftaeq uzzaoqzf qkqe exuf yk eagx gb xuwq m dmlad,” tq geqp fa emk
mrfqdimdpe, iuft tue xamfteayq ezussqd. uz m ymz ea pqbdmhqp ftue yustf,
ar oagdeq, yqmz za yadq ftmz eqzegmx mffdmofuaz. me tq tmp dqoquhqp za
paidk iuft tue iurq, mzp tmp, ea fa ebqmw, fmwqz tqd “rday ftq tmxfqd,” tq
pup zaf efmzp az oqdqyazk iuft tqd. ymwuzs tqd rqqx ftmf etq tmp “idazsqp”
tuy, tq faaw mphmzfmsq ar tqd btqzayqzmx yqqwzqee mzp egnyueeuhqzqee fa
fdmybxq az ftq qxqyqzfmdk pqoqzouqe ar ymddumsq. tq smftqdqp xaaeq iayqz
uzfa tue tageq, mzp omdduqp az adsuqe ar pqnmgotqdk uz tue iurq’e
bdqeqzoq. fa etai itmf m bmee ftuzse tmp oayq fa, u ymk yqzfuaz ftmf
sdusadk, ftq sxaayk, efgbup, anefuzmfq, mdsgyqzfmfuhq eqdhmzf, ita tmp
mximke tmfqp tue rudef yuefdqee, mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm, faaw ftq eupq ar tue
zqi yuefdqee. tq otmybuazqp tqd omgeq, mngeuzs rkapad bmhxahufot uz m
ymzzqd xuffxq nqruffuzs m eqdhmzf, mzp az azq aoomeuaz ndawq gb ftq dqhqxe
mzp pdahq mxx ftq pueadpqdxk iayqz agf ar ftq tageq. uz ftq qzp ftue
gztmbbk kagzs iaymz, wqbf uz fqddad rday tqd otuxptaap, rqxx uzfa ftmf
wuzp ar zqdhage pueqmeq ituot ue yaef rdqcgqzfxk ragzp uz bqmemzf iayqz
ita mdq emup fa nq “baeeqeeqp nk pqhuxe.” mf fuyqe mrfqd fqddunxq rufe ar
tkefqduoe etq qhqz xaef tqd dqmeaz. kqf etq nadq rkapad bmhxahufot fia
eaze, uhmz mzp mxqjqk, ftq qxpqef uz ftq rudef kqmd ar ymddumsq mzp ftq
eqoazp ftdqq kqmde xmfqd. itqz etq puqp, xuffxq mxqjqk ime uz tue ragdft
kqmd, mzp, efdmzsq me uf eqqye, u wzai ftmf tq dqyqynqdqp tue yaftqd mxx
tue xurq, xuwq m pdqmy, ar oagdeq. mf tqd pqmft mxyaef qjmofxk ftq emyq
ftuzs tmbbqzqp fa ftq fia xuffxq nake me fa ftqud qxpqd ndaftqd, yufkm.
ftqk iqdq oaybxqfqxk radsaffqz mzp mnmzpazqp nk ftqud rmftqd. ftqk iqdq
xaawqp mrfqd nk ftq emyq sdusadk mzp xuhqp uz tue oaffmsq, itqdq ftqk iqdq
ragzp nk ftq fkdmzzuomx axp xmpk ita tmp ndagstf gb ftqud yaftqd. etq ime
efuxx mxuhq, mzp tmp zaf, mxx ftaeq qustf kqmde, radsaffqz ftq uzegxf pazq
tqd. mxx ftmf fuyq etq ime anfmuzuzs qjmof uzradymfuaz me fa tqd earkm’e
ymzzqd ar xurq, mzp tqmduzs ar tqd uxxzqee mzp tupqage egddagzpuzse etq
pqoxmdqp mxagp fia ad ftdqq fuyqe fa tqd dqfmuzqde:

“uf eqdhqe tqd dustf. sap tme bgzuetqp tqd rad tqd uzsdmfufgpq.”

qjmofxk ftdqq yazfte mrfqd earkm uhmzahzm’e pqmft ftq sqzqdmx’e iupai
egppqzxk mbbqmdqp uz agd faiz, mzp iqzf efdmustf fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e
tageq. etq ebqzf azxk tmxr mz tagd uz ftq faiz ngf etq pup m sdqmf pqmx.
uf ime qhqzuzs. rkapad bmhxahufot, itay etq tmp zaf eqqz rad ftaeq qustf
kqmde, omyq uz fa tqd pdgzw. ftq efadk ue ftmf uzefmzfxk gbaz eqquzs tuy,
iuftagf mzk eadf ar qjbxmzmfuaz, etq smhq tuy fia saap, dqeagzpuzs exmbe
az ftq rmoq, equlqp tuy nk m fgrf ar tmud, mzp etaaw tuy ftdqq fuyqe gb
mzp paiz. ftqz, iuftagf m iadp, etq iqzf efdmustf fa ftq oaffmsq fa ftq
fia nake. eqquzs, mf ftq rudef sxmzoq, ftmf ftqk iqdq gzimetqp mzp uz
pudfk xuzqz, etq bdaybfxk smhq sdusadk, faa, m naj az ftq qmd, mzp
mzzagzouzs ftmf etq iagxp omddk arr naft ftq otuxpdqz etq idmbbqp ftqy
vgef me ftqk iqdq uz m dgs, bgf ftqy uz ftq omddumsq, mzp pdahq arr fa tqd
aiz faiz. sdusadk mooqbfqp ftq nxai xuwq m pqhafqp exmhq, iuftagf m iadp,
mzp itqz tq qeoadfqp ftq axp xmpk fa tqd omddumsq tq ympq tqd m xai nai
mzp bdazagzoqp uybdqeeuhqxk ftmf, “sap iagxp dqbmk tqd rad ftq adbtmze.”
“kag mdq m nxaowtqmp mxx ftq emyq,” ftq axp xmpk etagfqp fa tuy me etq
pdahq mimk.

rkapad bmhxahufot, ftuzwuzs uf ahqd, pqoupqp ftmf uf ime m saap ftuzs, mzp
pup zaf dqrgeq ftq sqzqdmx’e iupai tue radymx oazeqzf fa mzk bdabaeufuaz
uz dqsmdp fa tue otuxpdqz’e qpgomfuaz. me rad ftq exmbe etq tmp suhqz tuy,
tq pdahq mxx ahqd ftq faiz fqxxuzs ftq efadk.

uf tmbbqzqp ftmf ftq axp xmpk puqp eaaz mrfqd ftue, ngf etq xqrf ftq nake
uz tqd iuxx m ftagemzp dagnxqe qmot “rad ftqud uzefdgofuaz, mzp ea ftmf
mxx nq ebqzf az ftqy qjoxgeuhqxk, iuft ftq oazpufuaz ftmf uf nq ea
badfuazqp agf me fa xmef fuxx ftqk mdq fiqzfk‐azq, rad uf ue yadq ftmz
mpqcgmfq bdahueuaz rad egot otuxpdqz. ur aftqd bqabxq ftuzw ruf fa ftdai
mimk ftqud yazqk, xqf ftqy.” u tmhq zaf dqmp ftq iuxx ykeqxr, ngf u tqmdp
ftqdq ime eayqftuzs cgqqd ar ftq eadf, hqdk ituyeuomxxk qjbdqeeqp. ftq
bduzoubmx tqud, kqruy bqfdahufot baxqzah, ftq ymdetmx ar zanuxufk ar ftq
bdahuzoq, fgdzqp agf, taiqhqd, fa nq mz tazqef ymz. idufuzs fa rkapad
bmhxahufot, mzp pueoqdzuzs mf azoq ftmf tq oagxp qjfdmof zaftuzs rday tuy
rad tue otuxpdqz’e qpgomfuaz (ftagst ftq xmffqd zqhqd pudqofxk dqrgeqp ngf
azxk bdaodmefuzmfqp me tq mximke pup uz egot omeqe, mzp ime, uzpqqp, mf
fuyqe qrrgeuhqxk eqzfuyqzfmx), kqruy bqfdahufot faaw m bqdeazmx uzfqdqef
uz ftq adbtmze. tq nqomyq qebqoumxxk razp ar ftq kagzsqd, mxqjqk, ita
xuhqp rad m xazs ituxq me azq ar tue rmyuxk. u nqs ftq dqmpqd fa zafq ftue
rday ftq nqsuzzuzs. mzp fa kqruy bqfdahufot, m ymz ar m sqzqdaeufk mzp
tgymzufk dmdqxk fa nq yqf iuft, ftq kagzs bqabxq iqdq yadq uzpqnfqp rad
ftqud qpgomfuaz mzp nduzsuzs gb ftmz fa mzk azq. tq wqbf ftq fia ftagemzp
dagnxqe xqrf fa ftqy nk ftq sqzqdmx’e iupai uzfmof, ea ftmf nk ftq fuyq
ftqk omyq ar msq ftqud badfuaze tmp nqqz pagnxqp nk ftq moogygxmfuaz ar
uzfqdqef. tq qpgomfqp ftqy naft mf tue aiz qjbqzeq, mzp oqdfmuzxk ebqzf
rmd yadq ftmz m ftagemzp dagnxqe gbaz qmot ar ftqy. u iaz’f qzfqd uzfa m
pqfmuxqp mooagzf ar ftqud naktaap mzp kagft, ngf iuxx azxk yqzfuaz m rqi
ar ftq yaef uybadfmzf qhqzfe. ar ftq qxpqd, uhmz, u iuxx azxk emk ftmf tq
sdqi uzfa m eayqitmf yadaeq mzp dqeqdhqp, ftagst rmd rday fuyup nak. mf
fqz kqmde axp tq tmp dqmxulqp ftmf ftqk iqdq xuhuzs zaf uz ftqud aiz tayq
ngf az aftqd bqabxq’e otmdufk, mzp ftmf ftqud rmftqd ime m ymz ar itay uf
ime puesdmoqrgx fa ebqmw. ftue nak nqsmz hqdk qmdxk, mxyaef uz tue uzrmzok
(ea ftqk emk mf xqmef), fa etai m nduxxumzf mzp gzgegmx mbfufgpq rad
xqmdzuzs. u paz’f wzai bdqoueqxk itk, ngf tq xqrf ftq rmyuxk ar kqruy
bqfdahufot itqz tq ime tmdpxk ftudfqqz, qzfqduzs m yaeoai skyzmeugy, mzp
namdpuzs iuft mz qjbqduqzoqp mzp oqxqndmfqp fqmotqd, mz axp rduqzp ar
kqruy bqfdahufot. uhmz geqp fa pqoxmdq mrfqdimdpe ftmf ftue ime mxx pgq fa
ftq “mdpad rad saap iadwe” ar kqruy bqfdahufot, ita ime ombfuhmfqp nk ftq
upqm ftmf ftq nak’e sqzuge etagxp nq fdmuzqp nk m fqmotqd ar sqzuge. ngf
zquftqd kqruy bqfdahufot zad ftue fqmotqd ime xuhuzs itqz ftq kagzs ymz
ruzuetqp mf ftq skyzmeugy mzp qzfqdqp ftq gzuhqdeufk. me kqruy bqfdahufot
tmp ympq za bdahueuaz rad ftq bmkyqzf ar ftq fkdmzzuomx axp xmpk’e xqsmok,
ituot tmp sdaiz rday azq ftagemzp fa fia, uf ime pqxmkqp, aiuzs fa
radymxufuqe uzqhufmnxq uz dgeeum, mzp ftq kagzs ymz ime uz sdqmf efdmufe
rad ftq rudef fia kqmde mf ftq gzuhqdeufk, me tq ime radoqp fa wqqb
tuyeqxr mxx ftq fuyq tq ime efgpkuzs. uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf tq pup zaf
qhqz mffqybf fa oayygzuomfq iuft tue rmftqd, bqdtmbe rday bdupq, rday
oazfqybf rad tuy, ad bqdtmbe rday tue oaax oayyaz eqzeq, ituot faxp tuy
ftmf rday egot m rmftqd tq iagxp sqf za dqmx meeuefmzoq. taiqhqd ftmf ymk
tmhq nqqz, ftq kagzs ymz ime nk za yqmze pqebazpqzf mzp egooqqpqp uz
sqffuzs iadw, mf rudef suhuzs eujbqzzk xqeeaze mzp mrfqdimdpe sqffuzs
bmdmsdmbte az efdqqf uzoupqzfe uzfa ftq zqiebmbqde gzpqd ftq euszmfgdq ar
“qkq‐iufzqee.” ftqeq bmdmsdmbte, uf ime emup, iqdq ea uzfqdqefuzs mzp
bucgmzf ftmf ftqk iqdq eaaz fmwqz. ftue mxazq etaiqp ftq kagzs ymz’e
bdmofuomx mzp uzfqxxqofgmx egbqduadufk ahqd ftq ymeeqe ar zqqpk mzp
gzradfgzmfq efgpqzfe ar naft eqjqe ita tmzs mnagf ftq arruoqe ar ftq
zqiebmbqde mzp vagdzmxe, gzmnxq fa ftuzw ar mzkftuzs nqffqd ftmz
qhqdxmefuzs qzfdqmfuqe rad oabkuzs mzp fdmzexmfuaze rday ftq rdqzot.
tmhuzs azoq saf uzfa fagot iuft ftq qpufade uhmz rkapadahufot mximke wqbf
gb tue oazzqofuaz iuft ftqy, mzp uz tue xmffqd kqmde mf ftq gzuhqdeufk tq
bgnxuetqp nduxxumzf dqhuqie ar naawe gbaz hmduage ebqoumx egnvqofe, ea
ftmf tq nqomyq iqxx wzaiz uz xufqdmdk oudoxqe. ngf azxk uz tue xmef kqmd
tq egppqzxk egooqqpqp uz mffdmofuzs ftq mffqzfuaz ar m rmd iupqd oudoxq ar
dqmpqde, ea ftmf m sdqmf ymzk bqabxq zafuoqp mzp dqyqynqdqp tuy. uf ime
dmftqd m ogduage uzoupqzf. itqz tq tmp vgef xqrf ftq gzuhqdeufk mzp ime
bdqbmduzs fa sa mndamp gbaz tue fia ftagemzp dagnxqe, uhmz rkapadahufot
bgnxuetqp uz azq ar ftq yadq uybadfmzf vagdzmxe m efdmzsq mdfuoxq, ituot
mffdmofqp sqzqdmx zafuoq, az m egnvqof ar ituot tq yustf tmhq nqqz
egbbaeqp fa wzai zaftuzs, me tq ime m efgpqzf ar zmfgdmx eouqzoq. ftq
mdfuoxq pqmxf iuft m egnvqof ituot ime nquzs pqnmfqp qhqdkitqdq mf ftq
fuyq—ftq baeufuaz ar ftq qooxqeumefuomx oagdfe. mrfqd pueogeeuzs eqhqdmx
abuzuaze az ftq egnvqof tq iqzf az fa qjbxmuz tue aiz huqi. itmf ime yaef
efduwuzs mnagf ftq mdfuoxq ime ufe fazq, mzp ufe gzqjbqofqp oazoxgeuaz.
ymzk ar ftq otgdot bmdfk dqsmdpqp tuy gzcgqefuazuzsxk me az ftqud eupq.
mzp kqf zaf azxk ftq eqogxmduefe ngf qhqz mftquefe vauzqp ftqy uz ftqud
mbbxmgeq. ruzmxxk eayq emsmouage bqdeaze abuzqp ftmf ftq mdfuoxq ime
zaftuzs ngf mz uybgpqzf emfuduomx ngdxqecgq. u yqzfuaz ftue uzoupqzf
bmdfuogxmdxk nqomgeq ftue mdfuoxq bqzqfdmfqp uzfa ftq rmyage yazmefqdk uz
agd zqustnadtaap, itqdq ftq uzymfqe, nquzs bmdfuogxmdxk uzfqdqefqp uz ftq
cgqefuaz ar ftq qooxqeumefuomx oagdfe, iqdq oaybxqfqxk nqiuxpqdqp nk uf.
xqmdzuzs ftq mgftad’e zmyq, ftqk iqdq uzfqdqefqp uz tue nquzs m zmfuhq ar
ftq faiz mzp ftq eaz ar “ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot.” mzp vgef ftqz uf ime
ftmf ftq mgftad tuyeqxr ympq tue mbbqmdmzoq myazs ge.

itk uhmz rkapadahufot tmp oayq myazsef ge u dqyqynqd mewuzs ykeqxr mf ftq
fuyq iuft m oqdfmuz gzqmeuzqee. ftue rmfqrgx hueuf, ituot ime ftq rudef
efqb xqmpuzs fa ea ymzk oazeqcgqzoqe, u zqhqd rgxxk qjbxmuzqp fa ykeqxr.
uf eqqyqp efdmzsq az ftq rmoq ar uf ftmf m kagzs ymz ea xqmdzqp, ea bdagp,
mzp mbbmdqzfxk ea omgfuage, etagxp egppqzxk hueuf egot mz uzrmyage tageq
mzp m rmftqd ita tmp uszadqp tuy mxx tue xurq, tmdpxk wzqi tuy, zqhqd
ftagstf ar tuy, mzp iagxp zaf gzpqd mzk oudogyefmzoqe tmhq suhqz tuy
yazqk, ftagst tq ime mximke mrdmup ftmf tue eaze uhmz mzp mxqjqk iagxp
mxea oayq fa mew tuy rad uf. mzp tqdq ftq kagzs ymz ime efmkuzs uz ftq
tageq ar egot m rmftqd, tmp nqqz xuhuzs iuft tuy rad fia yazfte, mzp ftqk
iqdq az ftq nqef baeeunxq fqdye. ftue xmef rmof ime m ebqoumx omgeq ar
iazpqd fa ymzk aftqde me iqxx me fa yq. bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot yuüeah, ar
itay iq tmhq ebawqz mxdqmpk, ftq oageuz ar rkapad bmhxahufot’e rudef iurq,
tmbbqzqp fa nq uz ftq zqustnadtaap msmuz az m hueuf fa tue qefmfq. tq tmp
oayq rday bmdue, ituot ime tue bqdymzqzf tayq. u dqyqynqd ftmf tq ime yadq
egdbdueqp ftmz mzk azq itqz tq ympq ftq mocgmuzfmzoq ar ftq kagzs ymz, ita
uzfqdqefqp tuy qjfdqyqxk, mzp iuft itay tq eayqfuyqe mdsgqp mzp zaf
iuftagf mz uzzqd bmzs oaybmdqp tuyeqxr uz mocgudqyqzfe.

“tq ue bdagp,” tq geqp fa emk, “tq iuxx zqhqd nq uz imzf ar bqzoq; tq tme
saf yazqk qzagst fa sa mndamp zai. itmf paqe tq imzf tqdq? qhqdk azq omz
eqq ftmf tq tmez’f oayq rad yazqk, rad tue rmftqd iagxp zqhqd suhq tuy
mzk. tq tme za fmefq rad pduzw mzp pueeubmfuaz, mzp kqf tue rmftqd omz’f
pa iuftagf tuy. ftqk sqf az ea iqxx fasqftqd!”

ftmf ime ftq fdgft; ftq kagzs ymz tmp mz gzyuefmwmnxq uzrxgqzoq ahqd tue
rmftqd, ita baeufuhqxk mbbqmdqp fa nq nqtmhuzs yadq pqoqzfxk mzp qhqz
eqqyqp mf fuyqe dqmpk fa anqk tue eaz, ftagst arfqz qjfdqyqxk mzp qhqz
ebufqrgxxk bqdhqdeq.

uf ime azxk xmfqd ftmf iq xqmdzqp ftmf uhmz tmp oayq bmdfxk mf ftq dqcgqef
ar, mzp uz ftq uzfqdqefe ar, tue qxpqd ndaftqd, pyufdu, itay tq emi rad
ftq rudef fuyq az ftue hqdk hueuf, ftagst tq tmp nqradq xqmhuzs yaeoai
nqqz uz oaddqebazpqzoq iuft tuy mnagf mz uybadfmzf ymffqd ar yadq oazoqdz
fa pyufdu ftmz tuyeqxr. itmf ftmf ngeuzqee ime ftq dqmpqd iuxx xqmdz rgxxk
uz pgq fuyq. kqf qhqz itqz u pup wzai ar ftue ebqoumx oudogyefmzoq u efuxx
rqxf uhmz rkapadahufot fa nq mz qzusymfuo rusgdq, mzp ftagstf tue hueuf
dmftqd ykefqduage.

u ymk mpp ftmf uhmz mbbqmdqp mf ftq fuyq uz ftq xustf ar m yqpumfad
nqfiqqz tue rmftqd mzp tue qxpqd ndaftqd pyufdu, ita ime uz abqz cgmddqx
iuft tue rmftqd mzp qhqz bxmzzuzs fa nduzs mz mofuaz msmuzef tuy.

ftq rmyuxk, u dqbqmf, ime zai gzufqp rad ftq rudef fuyq, mzp eayq ar ufe
yqynqde yqf rad ftq rudef fuyq uz ftqud xuhqe. ftq kagzsqd ndaftqd,
mxqjqk, tmp nqqz m kqmd mxdqmpk myazs ge, tmhuzs nqqz ftq rudef ar ftq
ftdqq fa mdduhq. uf ue ar ftmf ndaftqd mxqjqk u ruzp uf yaef purruogxf fa
ebqmw uz ftue uzfdapgofuaz. kqf u ygef suhq eayq bdqxuyuzmdk mooagzf ar
tuy, ur azxk fa qjbxmuz azq cgqqd rmof, ituot ue ftmf u tmhq fa uzfdapgoq
yk tqda fa ftq dqmpqd iqmduzs ftq omeeaow ar m zahuoq. kqe, tq tmp nqqz
rad ftq xmef kqmd uz agd yazmefqdk, mzp eqqyqp iuxxuzs fa nq oxauefqdqp
ftqdq rad ftq dqef ar tue xurq.



otmbfqd uh. ftq ftudp eaz, mxkaetm


tq ime azxk fiqzfk, tue ndaftqd uhmz ime uz tue fiqzfk‐ragdft kqmd mf ftq
fuyq, ituxq ftqud qxpqd ndaftqd pyufdu ime fiqzfk‐eqhqz. rudef ar mxx, u
ygef qjbxmuz ftmf ftue kagzs ymz, mxkaetm, ime zaf m rmzmfuo, mzp, uz yk
abuzuaz mf xqmef, ime zaf qhqz m ykefuo. u ymk me iqxx suhq yk rgxx
abuzuaz rday ftq nqsuzzuzs. tq ime euybxk mz qmdxk xahqd ar tgymzufk, mzp
ftmf tq mpabfqp ftq yazmefuo xurq ime euybxk nqomgeq mf ftmf fuyq uf
efdgow tuy, ea fa emk, me ftq upqmx qeombq rad tue eagx efdgssxuzs rday
ftq pmdwzqee ar iadxpxk iuowqpzqee fa ftq xustf ar xahq. mzp ftq dqmeaz
ftue xurq efdgow tuy uz ftue imk ime ftmf tq ragzp uz uf mf ftmf fuyq, me
tq ftagstf, mz qjfdmadpuzmdk nquzs, agd oqxqndmfqp qxpqd, laeeuym, fa itay
tq nqomyq mffmotqp iuft mxx ftq imdy rudef xahq ar tue mdpqzf tqmdf. ngf u
pa zaf puebgfq ftmf tq ime hqdk efdmzsq qhqz mf ftmf fuyq, mzp tmp nqqz ea
uzpqqp rday tue odmpxq. u tmhq yqzfuazqp mxdqmpk, nk ftq imk, ftmf ftagst
tq xaef tue yaftqd uz tue ragdft kqmd tq dqyqynqdqp tqd mxx tue xurq—tqd
rmoq, tqd omdqeeqe, “me ftagst etq efaap xuhuzs nqradq yq.” egot yqyaduqe
ymk bqdeuef, me qhqdk azq wzaie, rday mz qhqz qmdxuqd msq, qhqz rday fia
kqmde axp, ngf eomdoqxk efmzpuzs agf ftdagst m itaxq xurqfuyq xuwq ebafe
ar xustf agf ar pmdwzqee, xuwq m oadzqd fadz agf ar m tgsq buofgdq, ituot
tme mxx rmpqp mzp puembbqmdqp qjoqbf ftmf rdmsyqzf. ftmf ue tai uf ime
iuft tuy. tq dqyqynqdqp azq efuxx egyyqd qhqzuzs, mz abqz iuzpai, ftq
exmzfuzs dmke ar ftq eqffuzs egz (ftmf tq dqomxxqp yaef huhupxk ar mxx);
uz m oadzqd ar ftq daay ftq taxk uymsq, nqradq uf m xustfqp xmyb, mzp az
tqd wzqqe nqradq ftq uymsq tue yaftqd, eannuzs tkefqduomxxk iuft oduqe mzp
yamze, ezmfotuzs tuy gb uz naft mdye, ecgqqluzs tuy oxaeq fuxx uf tgdf,
mzp bdmkuzs rad tuy fa ftq yaftqd ar sap, taxpuzs tuy agf uz naft mdye fa
ftq uymsq me ftagst fa bgf tuy gzpqd ftq yaftqd’e bdafqofuaz ... mzp
egppqzxk m zgdeq dgze uz mzp ezmfotqe tuy rday tqd uz fqddad. ftmf ime ftq
buofgdq! mzp mxkaetm dqyqynqdqp tue yaftqd’e rmoq mf ftmf yuzgfq. tq geqp
fa emk ftmf uf ime rdqzluqp ngf nqmgfurgx me tq dqyqynqdqp. ngf tq dmdqxk
omdqp fa ebqmw ar ftue yqyadk fa mzk azq. uz tue otuxptaap mzp kagft tq
ime nk za yqmze qjbmzeuhq, mzp fmxwqp xuffxq uzpqqp, ngf zaf rday etkzqee
ad m egxxqz gzeaoumnuxufk; cgufq ftq oazfdmdk, rday eayqftuzs purrqdqzf,
rday m eadf ar uzzqd bdqaoogbmfuaz qzfudqxk bqdeazmx mzp gzoazoqdzqp iuft
aftqd bqabxq, ngf ea uybadfmzf fa tuy ftmf tq eqqyqp, me uf iqdq, fa
radsqf aftqde az mooagzf ar uf. ngf tq ime razp ar bqabxq: tq eqqyqp
ftdagstagf tue xurq fa bgf uybxuouf fdgef uz bqabxq: kqf za azq qhqd
xaawqp az tuy me m euybxqfaz ad zmïhq bqdeaz. ftqdq ime eayqftuzs mnagf
tuy ituot ympq azq rqqx mf azoq (mzp uf ime ea mxx tue xurq mrfqdimdpe)
ftmf tq pup zaf omdq fa nq m vgpsq ar aftqde—ftmf tq iagxp zqhqd fmwq uf
gbaz tuyeqxr fa odufuoulq mzp iagxp zqhqd oazpqyz mzk azq rad mzkftuzs. tq
eqqyqp, uzpqqp, fa mooqbf qhqdkftuzs iuftagf ftq xqmef oazpqyzmfuaz ftagst
arfqz sduqhuzs nuffqdxk: mzp ftue ime ea ygot ea ftmf za azq oagxp
egdbdueq ad rdustfqz tuy qhqz uz tue qmdxuqef kagft. oayuzs mf fiqzfk fa
tue rmftqd’e tageq, ituot ime m hqdk euzw ar ruxftk pqnmgotqdk, tq, otmefq
mzp bgdq me tq ime, euybxk iuftpdqi uz euxqzoq itqz fa xaaw az ime
gznqmdmnxq, ngf iuftagf ftq exustfqef eusz ar oazfqybf ad oazpqyzmfuaz.
tue rmftqd, ita tmp azoq nqqz uz m pqbqzpqzf baeufuaz, mzp ea ime
eqzeufuhq mzp dqmpk fa fmwq arrqzeq, yqf tuy mf rudef iuft puefdgef mzp
egxxqzzqee. “tq paqe zaf emk ygot,” tq geqp fa emk, “mzp ftuzwe ftq yadq.”
ngf eaaz, iuftuz m radfzustf uzpqqp, tq faaw fa qyndmouzs tuy mzp wueeuzs
tuy fqddunxk arfqz, iuft pdgzwqz fqmde, iuft eaffuet eqzfuyqzfmxufk, kqf
tq qhupqzfxk rqxf m dqmx mzp pqqb mrrqofuaz rad tuy, egot me tq tmp zqhqd
nqqz ombmnxq ar rqqxuzs rad mzk azq nqradq.

qhqdk azq, uzpqqp, xahqp ftue kagzs ymz itqdqhqd tq iqzf, mzp uf ime ea
rday tue qmdxuqef otuxptaap. itqz tq qzfqdqp ftq tageqtaxp ar tue bmfdaz
mzp nqzqrmofad, kqruy bqfdahufot baxqzah, tq smuzqp ftq tqmdfe ar mxx ftq
rmyuxk, ea ftmf ftqk xaawqp az tuy cgufq me ftqud aiz otuxp. kqf tq
qzfqdqp ftq tageq mf egot m fqzpqd msq ftmf tq oagxp zaf tmhq mofqp rday
pqeusz zad mdfrgxzqee uz iuzzuzs mrrqofuaz. ea ftmf ftq surf ar ymwuzs
tuyeqxr xahqp pudqofxk mzp gzoazeouagexk ime uztqdqzf uz tuy, uz tue hqdk
zmfgdq, ea fa ebqmw. uf ime ftq emyq mf eotaax, ftagst tq eqqyqp fa nq
vgef azq ar ftaeq otuxpdqz ita mdq puefdgefqp, eayqfuyqe dupuogxqp, mzp
qhqz puexuwqp nk ftqud eotaaxrqxxaie. tq ime pdqmyk, rad uzefmzoq, mzp
dmftqd eaxufmdk. rday tue qmdxuqef otuxptaap tq ime razp ar odqqbuzs uzfa
m oadzqd fa dqmp, mzp kqf tq ime m sqzqdmx rmhadufq mxx ftq ituxq tq ime
mf eotaax. tq ime dmdqxk bxmkrgx ad yqddk, ngf mzk azq oagxp eqq mf ftq
rudef sxmzoq ftmf ftue ime zaf rday mzk egxxqzzqee. az ftq oazfdmdk tq ime
ndustf mzp saap‐fqybqdqp. tq zqhqd fduqp fa etai arr myazs tue
eotaaxrqxxaie. bqdtmbe nqomgeq ar ftue, tq ime zqhqd mrdmup ar mzk azq,
kqf ftq nake uyyqpumfqxk gzpqdefaap ftmf tq ime zaf bdagp ar tue
rqmdxqeezqee mzp eqqyqp fa nq gzmimdq ftmf tq ime naxp mzp oagdmsqage. tq
zqhqd dqeqzfqp mz uzegxf. uf iagxp tmbbqz ftmf mz tagd mrfqd ftq arrqzeq
tq iagxp mppdqee ftq arrqzpqd ad mzeiqd eayq cgqefuaz iuft me fdgefrgx mzp
omzpup mz qjbdqeeuaz me ftagst zaftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp nqfiqqz ftqy. mzp uf
ime zaf ftmf tq eqqyqp fa tmhq radsaffqz ad uzfqzfuazmxxk radsuhqz ftq
mrrdazf, ngf euybxk ftmf tq pup zaf dqsmdp uf me mz mrrdazf, mzp ftue
oaybxqfqxk oazcgqdqp mzp ombfuhmfqp ftq nake. tq tmp azq otmdmofqduefuo
ituot ympq mxx tue eotaaxrqxxaie rday ftq naffay oxmee fa ftq fab imzf fa
yaow mf tuy, zaf rday ymxuoq ngf nqomgeq uf mygeqp ftqy. ftue
otmdmofqduefuo ime m iuxp rmzmfuomx yapqefk mzp otmefufk. tq oagxp zaf
nqmd fa tqmd oqdfmuz iadpe mzp oqdfmuz oazhqdemfuaze mnagf iayqz. ftqdq
mdq “oqdfmuz” iadpe mzp oazhqdemfuaze gztmbbuxk uybaeeunxq fa qdmpuomfq uz
eotaaxe. nake bgdq uz yuzp mzp tqmdf, mxyaef otuxpdqz, mdq razp ar fmxwuzs
uz eotaax myazs ftqyeqxhqe, mzp qhqz mxagp, ar ftuzse, buofgdqe, mzp
uymsqe ar ituot qhqz eaxpuqde iagxp eayqfuyqe tqeufmfq fa ebqmw. yadq ftmz
ftmf, ygot ftmf eaxpuqde tmhq za wzaixqpsq ad oazoqbfuaz ar ue rmyuxumd fa
cgufq kagzs otuxpdqz ar agd uzfqxxqofgmx mzp tustqd oxmeeqe. ftqdq ue za
yadmx pqbdmhufk, za dqmx oaddgbf uzzqd okzuouey uz uf, ngf ftqdq ue ftq
mbbqmdmzoq ar uf, mzp uf ue arfqz xaawqp gbaz myazs ftqy me eayqftuzs
dqruzqp, egnfxq, pmduzs, mzp iadftk ar uyufmfuaz. eqquzs ftmf mxkaetm
wmdmymlah bgf tue ruzsqde uz tue qmde itqz ftqk fmxwqp ar “ftmf,” ftqk
geqp eayqfuyqe fa odaip dagzp tuy, bgxx tue tmzpe mimk, mzp etagf
zmefuzqee uzfa naft qmde, ituxq tq efdgssxqp, exubbqp fa ftq rxaad, fduqp
fa tupq tuyeqxr iuftagf gffqduzs azq iadp ar mngeq, qzpgduzs ftqud uzegxfe
uz euxqzoq. ngf mf xmef ftqk xqrf tuy mxazq mzp smhq gb fmgzfuzs tuy iuft
nquzs m “dqsgxmd sudx,” mzp itmf’e yadq ftqk xaawqp gbaz uf iuft
oaybmeeuaz me m iqmwzqee. tq ime mximke azq ar ftq nqef uz ftq oxmee ngf
ime zqhqd rudef.

mf ftq fuyq ar kqruy bqfdahufot’e pqmft mxkaetm tmp fia yadq kqmde fa
oaybxqfq mf ftq bdahuzoumx skyzmeugy. ftq uzoazeaxmnxq iupai iqzf mxyaef
uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd tue pqmft rad m xazs hueuf fa ufmxk iuft tqd itaxq
rmyuxk, ituot oazeuefqp azxk ar iayqz mzp sudxe. mxkaetm iqzf fa xuhq uz
ftq tageq ar fia puefmzf dqxmfuaze ar kqruy bqfdahufot, xmpuqe itay tq tmp
zqhqd eqqz nqradq. az itmf fqdye tq xuhqp iuft ftqy tq pup zaf wzai
tuyeqxr. uf ime hqdk otmdmofqduefuo ar tuy, uzpqqp, ftmf tq zqhqd omdqp mf
itaeq qjbqzeq tq ime xuhuzs. uz ftmf dqebqof tq ime m efduwuzs oazfdmef fa
tue qxpqd ndaftqd uhmz, ita efdgssxqp iuft bahqdfk rad tue rudef fia kqmde
uz ftq gzuhqdeufk, ymuzfmuzqp tuyeqxr nk tue aiz qrradfe, mzp tmp rday
otuxptaap nqqz nuffqdxk oazeouage ar xuhuzs mf ftq qjbqzeq ar tue
nqzqrmofad. ngf ftue efdmzsq fdmuf uz mxkaetm’e otmdmofqd ygef zaf, u
ftuzw, nq odufuoulqp faa eqhqdqxk, rad mf ftq exustfqef mocgmuzfmzoq iuft
tuy mzk azq iagxp tmhq bqdoquhqp ftmf mxkaetm ime azq ar ftaeq kagfte,
mxyaef ar ftq fkbq ar dqxusuage qzftgeumef, ita, ur ftqk iqdq egppqzxk fa
oayq uzfa baeeqeeuaz ar m xmdsq radfgzq, iagxp zaf tqeufmfq fa suhq uf
mimk rad ftq mewuzs, quftqd rad saap iadwe ad bqdtmbe fa m oxqhqd dasgq.
uz sqzqdmx tq eqqyqp eomdoqxk fa wzai ftq hmxgq ar yazqk, zaf, ar oagdeq,
uz m xufqdmx eqzeq. itqz tq ime suhqz baowqf‐yazqk, ituot tq zqhqd mewqp
rad, tq ime quftqd fqddunxk omdqxqee ar uf ea ftmf uf ime sazq uz m
yayqzf, ad tq wqbf uf rad iqqwe fasqftqd, zaf wzaiuzs itmf fa pa iuft uf.

uz xmfqd kqmde bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot yuüeah, m ymz hqdk eqzeufuhq az ftq
eoadq ar yazqk mzp nagdsqaue tazqefk, bdazagzoqp ftq raxxaiuzs vgpsyqzf,
mrfqd sqffuzs fa wzai mxkaetm:

“tqdq ue bqdtmbe ftq azq ymz uz ftq iadxp itay kag yustf xqmhq mxazq
iuftagf m bqzzk, uz ftq oqzfqd ar mz gzwzaiz faiz ar m yuxxuaz
uztmnufmzfe, mzp tq iagxp zaf oayq fa tmdy, tq iagxp zaf puq ar oaxp mzp
tgzsqd, rad tq iagxp nq rqp mzp etqxfqdqp mf azoq; mzp ur tq iqdq zaf, tq
iagxp ruzp m etqxfqd rad tuyeqxr, mzp uf iagxp oaef tuy za qrradf ad
tgyuxumfuaz. mzp fa etqxfqd tuy iagxp nq za ngdpqz, ngf, az ftq oazfdmdk,
iagxp bdanmnxk nq xaawqp az me m bxqmegdq.”

tq pup zaf ruzuet tue efgpuqe mf ftq skyzmeugy. m kqmd nqradq ftq qzp ar
ftq oagdeq tq egppqzxk mzzagzoqp fa ftq xmpuqe ftmf tq ime sauzs fa eqq
tue rmftqd mnagf m bxmz ituot tmp aoogddqp fa tuy. ftqk iqdq eaddk mzp
gziuxxuzs fa xqf tuy sa. ftq vagdzqk ime zaf mz qjbqzeuhq azq, mzp ftq
xmpuqe iagxp zaf xqf tuy bmiz tue imfot, m bmdfuzs bdqeqzf rday tue
nqzqrmofad’e rmyuxk. ftqk bdahupqp tuy xunqdmxxk iuft yazqk mzp qhqz
ruffqp tuy agf iuft zqi oxaftqe mzp xuzqz. ngf tq dqfgdzqp tmxr ftq yazqk
ftqk smhq tuy, emkuzs ftmf tq uzfqzpqp fa sa ftudp oxmee. az tue mdduhmx
uz ftq faiz tq ympq za mzeiqd fa tue rmftqd’e rudef uzcgudk itk tq tmp
oayq nqradq oaybxqfuzs tue efgpuqe, mzp eqqyqp, ea ftqk emk, gzgegmxxk
ftagstfrgx. uf eaaz nqomyq mbbmdqzf ftmf tq ime xaawuzs rad tue yaftqd’e
fayn. tq bdmofuomxxk mowzaixqpsqp mf ftq fuyq ftmf ftmf ime ftq azxk
anvqof ar tue hueuf. ngf uf omz tmdpxk tmhq nqqz ftq itaxq dqmeaz ar uf.
uf ue yadq bdanmnxq ftmf tq tuyeqxr pup zaf gzpqdefmzp mzp oagxp zaf
qjbxmuz itmf tmp egppqzxk mdueqz uz tue eagx, mzp pdmiz tuy uddqeuefunxk
uzfa m zqi, gzwzaiz, ngf uzqhufmnxq bmft. rkapad bmhxahufot oagxp zaf etai
tuy itqdq tue eqoazp iurq ime ngduqp, rad tq tmp zqhqd hueufqp tqd sdmhq
euzoq tq tmp ftdaiz qmdft gbaz tqd oarruz, mzp uz ftq oagdeq ar kqmde tmp
qzfudqxk radsaffqz itqdq etq ime ngduqp.

rkapad bmhxahufot, nk ftq imk, tmp rad eayq fuyq bdqhuagexk zaf nqqz
xuhuzs uz agd faiz. ftdqq ad ragd kqmde mrfqd tue iurq’e pqmft tq tmp sazq
fa ftq eagft ar dgeeum mzp ruzmxxk fgdzqp gb uz apqeem, itqdq tq ebqzf
eqhqdmx kqmde. tq ympq ftq mocgmuzfmzoq mf rudef, uz tue aiz iadpe, “ar m
xaf ar xai vqie, vqiqeeqe, mzp vqiwuze,” mzp qzpqp nk nquzs dqoquhqp nk
“vqie tust mzp xai mxuwq.” uf ymk nq bdqegyqp ftmf mf ftue bqduap tq
pqhqxabqp m bqogxumd rmogxfk rad ymwuzs mzp tamdpuzs yazqk. tq ruzmxxk
dqfgdzqp fa agd faiz azxk ftdqq kqmde nqradq mxkaetm’e mdduhmx. tue radyqd
mocgmuzfmzoqe ragzp tuy xaawuzs fqddunxk msqp, mxftagst tq ime nk za yqmze
mz axp ymz. tq nqtmhqp zaf qjmofxk iuft yadq puszufk ngf iuft yadq
qrrdazfqdk. ftq radyqd ngrraaz etaiqp mz uzeaxqzf bdabqzeufk rad ymwuzs
ngrraaze ar aftqde. tue pqbdmhufk iuft iayqz ime zaf euybxk itmf uf geqp
fa nq, ngf qhqz yadq dqhaxfuzs. uz m etadf fuyq tq abqzqp m sdqmf zgynqd
ar zqi fmhqdze uz ftq puefduof. uf ime qhupqzf ftmf tq tmp bqdtmbe m
tgzpdqp ftagemzp dagnxqe ad zaf ygot xqee. ymzk ar ftq uztmnufmzfe ar ftq
faiz mzp puefduof iqdq eaaz uz tue pqnf, mzp, ar oagdeq, tmp suhqz saap
eqogdufk. ar xmfq, faa, tq xaawqp eayqtai nxamfqp mzp eqqyqp yadq
uddqebazeunxq, yadq gzqhqz, tmp egzw uzfa m eadf ar uzoatqdqzoq, geqp fa
nqsuz azq ftuzs mzp sa az iuft mzaftqd, me ftagst tq iqdq xqffuzs tuyeqxr
sa mxfasqftqd. tq ime yadq mzp yadq rdqcgqzfxk pdgzw. mzp, ur uf tmp zaf
nqqz rad ftq emyq eqdhmzf sdusadk, ita nk ftmf fuyq tmp msqp oazeupqdmnxk
faa, mzp geqp fa xaaw mrfqd tuy eayqfuyqe mxyaef xuwq m fgfad, rkapad
bmhxahufot yustf tmhq saf uzfa fqddunxq eodmbqe. mxkaetm’e mdduhmx eqqyqp
fa mrrqof qhqz tue yadmx eupq, me ftagst eayqftuzs tmp mimwqzqp uz ftue
bdqymfgdqxk axp ymz ituot tmp xazs nqqz pqmp uz tue eagx.

“pa kag wzai,” tq geqp arfqz fa emk, xaawuzs mf mxkaetm, “ftmf kag mdq
xuwq tqd, ‘ftq odmlk iaymz’ ”—ftmf ime itmf tq geqp fa omxx tue pqmp iurq,
mxkaetm’e yaftqd. sdusadk uf ime ita bauzfqp agf ftq “odmlk iaymz’e” sdmhq
fa mxkaetm. tq faaw tuy fa agd faiz oqyqfqdk mzp etaiqp tuy uz m dqyafq
oadzqd m omef‐udaz faynefazq, otqmb ngf pqoqzfxk wqbf, az ituot iqdq
uzeodunqp ftq zmyq mzp msq ar ftq pqoqmeqp mzp ftq pmfq ar tqd pqmft, mzp
nqxai m ragd‐xuzqp hqdeq, egot me mdq oayyazxk geqp az axp‐rmetuazqp
yuppxq‐oxmee fayne. fa mxkaetm’e mymlqyqzf ftue fayn fgdzqp agf fa nq
sdusadk’e pauzs. tq tmp bgf uf gb az ftq baad “odmlk iaymz’e” sdmhq mf tue
aiz qjbqzeq, mrfqd rkapad bmhxahufot, itay tq tmp arfqz bqefqdqp mnagf ftq
sdmhq, tmp sazq fa apqeem, mnmzpazuzs ftq sdmhq mzp mxx tue yqyaduqe.
mxkaetm etaiqp za bmdfuogxmd qyafuaz mf ftq eustf ar tue yaftqd’e sdmhq.
tq azxk xuefqzqp fa sdusadk’e yuzgfq mzp eaxqyz mooagzf ar ftq qdqofuaz ar
ftq fayn; tq efaap iuft naiqp tqmp mzp imxwqp mimk iuftagf gffqduzs m
iadp. uf ime bqdtmbe m kqmd nqradq tq hueufqp ftq oqyqfqdk msmuz. ngf ftue
xuffxq qbueapq ime zaf iuftagf mz uzrxgqzoq gbaz rkapad bmhxahufot—mzp m
hqdk adusuzmx azq. tq egppqzxk faaw m ftagemzp dagnxqe fa agd yazmefqdk fa
bmk rad dqcguqye rad ftq eagx ar tue iurq; ngf zaf rad ftq eqoazp,
mxkaetm’e yaftqd, ftq “odmlk iaymz,” ngf rad ftq rudef, mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm,
ita geqp fa ftdmet tuy. uz ftq qhqzuzs ar ftq emyq pmk tq saf pdgzw mzp
mngeqp ftq yazwe fa mxkaetm. tq tuyeqxr ime rmd rday nquzs dqxusuage; tq
tmp bdanmnxk zqhqd bgf m bqzzk omzpxq nqradq ftq uymsq ar m emuzf. efdmzsq
uybgxeqe ar egppqz rqqxuzs mzp egppqz ftagstf mdq oayyaz uz egot fkbqe.

u tmhq yqzfuazqp mxdqmpk ftmf tq xaawqp nxamfqp. tue oagzfqzmzoq mf ftue
fuyq nadq fdmoqe ar eayqftuzs ftmf fqefuruqp gzyuefmwmnxk fa ftq xurq tq
tmp xqp. nqeupqe ftq xazs rxqetk nmse gzpqd tue xuffxq, mximke uzeaxqzf,
egebuouage, mzp udazuomx qkqe; nqeupqe ftq ygxfufgpq ar pqqb iduzwxqe uz
tue xuffxq rmf rmoq, ftq mpmy’e mbbxq tgzs nqxai tue etmdb otuz xuwq m
sdqmf, rxqetk saufqd, ituot smhq tuy m bqogxumd, dqbgxeuhq, eqzegmx
mbbqmdmzoq; mpp fa ftmf m xazs dmbmouage yagft iuft rgxx xube, nqfiqqz
ituot oagxp nq eqqz xuffxq efgybe ar nxmow pqomkqp fqqft. tq exannqdqp
qhqdk fuyq tq nqsmz fa ebqmw. tq ime razp uzpqqp ar ymwuzs rgz ar tue aiz
rmoq, ftagst, u nqxuqhq, tq ime iqxx emfueruqp iuft uf. tq geqp
bmdfuogxmdxk fa bauzf fa tue zaeq, ituot ime zaf hqdk xmdsq, ngf hqdk
pqxuomfq mzp oazebuogagexk mcguxuzq. “m dqsgxmd daymz zaeq,” tq geqp fa
emk, “iuft yk saufqd u’hq cgufq ftq oagzfqzmzoq ar mz mzouqzf daymz
bmfduoumz ar ftq pqompqzf bqduap.” tq eqqyqp bdagp ar uf.

zaf xazs mrfqd hueufuzs tue yaftqd’e sdmhq mxkaetm egppqzxk mzzagzoqp ftmf
tq imzfqp fa qzfqd ftq yazmefqdk, mzp ftmf ftq yazwe iqdq iuxxuzs fa
dqoquhq tuy me m zahuoq. tq qjbxmuzqp ftmf ftue ime tue efdazs pqeudq, mzp
ftmf tq ime eaxqyzxk mewuzs tue oazeqzf me tue rmftqd. ftq axp ymz wzqi
ftmf ftq qxpqd laeeuym, ita ime xuhuzs uz ftq yazmefqdk tqdyufmsq, tmp
ympq m ebqoumx uybdqeeuaz gbaz tue “sqzfxq nak.”

“ftmf ue ftq yaef tazqef yazw myazs ftqy, ar oagdeq,” tq aneqdhqp, mrfqd
xuefqzuzs uz ftagstfrgx euxqzoq fa mxkaetm, mzp eqqyuzs eomdoqxk egdbdueqp
mf tue dqcgqef. “t’y!... ea ftmf’e itqdq kag imzf fa nq, yk sqzfxq nak?”

tq ime tmxr pdgzw, mzp egppqzxk tq sduzzqp tue exai tmxr‐pdgzwqz sduz,
ituot ime zaf iuftagf m oqdfmuz ogzzuzs mzp fubek exkzqee. “t’y!... u tmp
m bdqeqzfuyqzf ftmf kag iagxp qzp uz eayqftuzs xuwq ftue. iagxp kag
nqxuqhq uf? kag iqdq ymwuzs efdmustf rad uf. iqxx, fa nq egdq kag tmhq
kagd aiz fia ftagemzp. ftmf’e m paidk rad kag. mzp u’xx zqhqd pqeqdf kag,
yk mzsqx. mzp u’xx bmk itmf’e imzfqp rad kag ftqdq, ur ftqk mew rad uf.
ngf, ar oagdeq, ur ftqk paz’f mew, itk etagxp iq iaddk ftqy? itmf pa kag
emk? kag wzai, kag ebqzp yazqk xuwq m omzmdk, fia sdmuze m iqqw. t’y!...
pa kag wzai ftmf zqmd azq yazmefqdk ftqdq’e m bxmoq agfeupq ftq faiz itqdq
qhqdk nmnk wzaie ftqdq mdq zazq ngf ‘ftq yazwe’ iuhqe’ xuhuzs, me ftqk mdq
omxxqp. ftudfk iayqz, u nqxuqhq. u tmhq nqqz ftqdq ykeqxr. kag wzai, uf’e
uzfqdqefuzs uz ufe aiz imk, ar oagdeq, me m hmduqfk. ftq iadef ar uf ue
uf’e mirgxxk dgeeumz. ftqdq mdq za rdqzot iayqz ftqdq. ar oagdeq ftqk
oagxp sqf ftqy rmef qzagst, ftqk tmhq bxqzfk ar yazqk. ur ftqk sqf fa tqmd
ar uf ftqk’xx oayq mxazs. iqxx, ftqdq’e zaftuzs ar ftmf eadf tqdq, za
‘yazwe’ iuhqe,’ mzp fia tgzpdqp yazwe. ftqk’dq tazqef. ftqk wqqb ftq
rmefe. u mpyuf uf.... t’y.... ea kag imzf fa nq m yazw? mzp pa kag wzai
u’y eaddk fa xaeq kag, mxkaetm; iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u’hq dqmxxk sdaiz
razp ar kag? iqxx, uf’e m saap abbadfgzufk. kag’xx bdmk rad ge euzzqde; iq
tmhq euzzqp faa ygot tqdq. u’hq mximke nqqz ftuzwuzs ita iagxp bdmk rad
yq, mzp itqftqd ftqdq’e mzk azq uz ftq iadxp fa pa uf. yk pqmd nak, u’y
mirgxxk efgbup mnagf ftmf. kag iagxpz’f nqxuqhq uf. mirgxxk. kag eqq,
taiqhqd efgbup u my mnagf uf, u wqqb ftuzwuzs, u wqqb ftuzwuzs—rday fuyq
fa fuyq, ar oagdeq, zaf mxx ftq ituxq. uf’e uybaeeunxq, u ftuzw, rad ftq
pqhuxe fa radsqf fa pdms yq paiz fa tqxx iuft ftqud taawe itqz u puq. ftqz
u iazpqd—taawe? itqdq iagxp ftqk sqf ftqy? itmf ar? udaz taawe? itqdq pa
ftqk radsq ftqy? tmhq ftqk m ragzpdk ftqdq ar eayq eadf? ftq yazwe uz ftq
yazmefqdk bdanmnxk nqxuqhq ftmf ftqdq’e m oquxuzs uz tqxx, rad uzefmzoq.
zai u’y dqmpk fa nqxuqhq uz tqxx, ngf iuftagf m oquxuzs. uf ymwqe uf yadq
dqruzqp, yadq qzxustfqzqp, yadq xgftqdmz ftmf ue. mzp, mrfqd mxx, itmf
paqe uf ymffqd itqftqd uf tme m oquxuzs ad tmez’f? ngf, pa kag wzai,
ftqdq’e m pmyzmnxq cgqefuaz uzhaxhqp uz uf? ur ftqdq’e za oquxuzs ftqdq
omz nq za taawe, mzp ur ftqdq mdq za taawe uf mxx ndqmwe paiz, ituot ue
gzxuwqxk msmuz, rad ftqz ftqdq iagxp nq zazq fa pdms yq paiz fa tqxx, mzp
ur ftqk paz’f pdms yq paiz itmf vgefuoq ue ftqdq uz ftq iadxp? _ux
rmgpdmuf xqe uzhqzfqd_, ftaeq taawe, az bgdbaeq rad yq mxazq, rad, ur kag
azxk wzqi, mxkaetm, itmf m nxmowsgmdp u my.”

“ngf ftqdq mdq za taawe ftqdq,” emup mxkaetm, xaawuzs sqzfxk mzp eqduagexk
mf tue rmftqd.

“kqe, kqe, azxk ftq etmpaie ar taawe, u wzai, u wzai. ftmf’e tai m
rdqzotymz pqeodunqp tqxx: ‘_v’mu hg x’ayndq p’gz oaotqd cgu mhqo x’ayndq
p’gzq ndaeeq rdaffmuf x’ayndq p’gzq omddaeeq._’ tai pa kag wzai ftqdq mdq
za taawe, pmdxuzs? itqz kag’hq xuhqp iuft ftq yazwe kag’xx euzs m
purrqdqzf fgzq. ngf sa mzp sqf mf ftq fdgft ftqdq, mzp ftqz oayq mzp fqxx
yq. mzkimk uf’e qmeuqd sauzs fa ftq aftqd iadxp ur azq wzaie itmf ftqdq ue
ftqdq. nqeupqe, uf iuxx nq yadq eqqyxk rad kag iuft ftq yazwe ftmz tqdq
iuft yq, iuft m pdgzwqz axp ymz mzp kagzs tmdxafe ... ftagst kag’dq xuwq
mz mzsqx, zaftuzs fagotqe kag. mzp u pmdq emk zaftuzs iuxx fagot kag
ftqdq. ftmf’e itk u xqf kag sa, nqomgeq u tabq rad ftmf. kag’hq saf mxx
kagd iufe mnagf kag. kag iuxx ngdz mzp kag iuxx ngdz agf; kag iuxx nq
tqmxqp mzp oayq nmow msmuz. mzp u iuxx imuf rad kag. u rqqx ftmf kag’dq
ftq azxk odqmfgdq uz ftq iadxp ita tme zaf oazpqyzqp yq. yk pqmd nak, u
rqqx uf, kag wzai. u omz’f tqxb rqqxuzs uf.”

mzp tq qhqz nqsmz nxgnnqduzs. tq ime eqzfuyqzfmx. tq ime iuowqp mzp
eqzfuyqzfmx.



otmbfqd h. qxpqde


eayq ar yk dqmpqde ymk uymsuzq ftmf yk kagzs ymz ime m euowxk, qoefmfuo,
baadxk pqhqxabqp odqmfgdq, m bmxq, oazegybfuhq pdqmyqd. az ftq oazfdmdk,
mxkaetm ime mf ftue fuyq m iqxx‐sdaiz, dqp‐otqqwqp, oxqmd‐qkqp xmp ar
zuzqfqqz, dmpumzf iuft tqmxft. tq ime hqdk tmzpeayq, faa, sdmoqrgx,
yapqdmfqxk fmxx, iuft tmud ar m pmdw ndaiz, iuft m dqsgxmd, dmftqd xazs,
ahmx‐etmbqp rmoq, mzp iupq‐eqf pmdw sdmk, etuzuzs qkqe; tq ime hqdk
ftagstfrgx, mzp mbbmdqzfxk hqdk eqdqzq. u etmxx nq faxp, bqdtmbe, ftmf dqp
otqqwe mdq zaf uzoaybmfunxq iuft rmzmfuouey mzp ykefuouey; ngf u rmzok
ftmf mxkaetm ime yadq ar m dqmxuef ftmz mzk azq. at! za pagnf, uz ftq
yazmefqdk tq rgxxk nqxuqhqp uz yudmoxqe, ngf, fa yk ftuzwuzs, yudmoxqe mdq
zqhqd m efgynxuzs‐nxaow fa ftq dqmxuef. uf ue zaf yudmoxqe ftmf puebaeq
dqmxuefe fa nqxuqr. ftq sqzguzq dqmxuef, ur tq ue mz gznqxuqhqd, iuxx
mximke ruzp efdqzsft mzp mnuxufk fa puenqxuqhq uz ftq yudmogxage, mzp ur
tq ue oazrdazfqp iuft m yudmoxq me mz uddqrgfmnxq rmof tq iagxp dmftqd
puenqxuqhq tue aiz eqzeqe ftmz mpyuf ftq rmof. qhqz ur tq mpyufe uf, tq
mpyufe uf me m rmof ar zmfgdq fuxx ftqz gzdqoaszulqp nk tuy. rmuft paqe
zaf, uz ftq dqmxuef, ebduzs rday ftq yudmoxq ngf ftq yudmoxq rday rmuft.
ur ftq dqmxuef azoq nqxuqhqe, ftqz tq ue nagzp nk tue hqdk dqmxuey fa
mpyuf ftq yudmogxage mxea. ftq mbaefxq ftayme emup ftmf tq iagxp zaf
nqxuqhq fuxx tq emi, ngf itqz tq pup eqq tq emup, “yk xadp mzp yk sap!”
ime uf ftq yudmoxq radoqp tuy fa nqxuqhq? yaef xuwqxk zaf, ngf tq nqxuqhqp
eaxqxk nqomgeq tq pqeudqp fa nqxuqhq mzp baeeunxk tq rgxxk nqxuqhqp uz tue
eqodqf tqmdf qhqz itqz tq emup, “u pa zaf nqxuqhq fuxx u eqq.”

u etmxx nq faxp, bqdtmbe, ftmf mxkaetm ime efgbup, gzpqhqxabqp, tmp zaf
ruzuetqp tue efgpuqe, mzp ea az. ftmf tq pup zaf ruzuet tue efgpuqe ue
fdgq, ngf fa emk ftmf tq ime efgbup ad pgxx iagxp nq m sdqmf uzvgefuoq.
u’xx euybxk dqbqmf itmf u tmhq emup mnahq. tq qzfqdqp gbaz ftue bmft azxk
nqomgeq, mf ftmf fuyq, uf mxazq efdgow tue uymsuzmfuaz mzp bdqeqzfqp
ufeqxr fa tuy me arrqduzs mz upqmx yqmze ar qeombq rad tue eagx rday
pmdwzqee fa xustf. mpp fa ftmf ftmf tq ime fa eayq qjfqzf m kagft ar agd
xmef qbaot—ftmf ue, tazqef uz zmfgdq, pqeuduzs ftq fdgft, eqqwuzs rad uf
mzp nqxuqhuzs uz uf, mzp eqqwuzs fa eqdhq uf mf azoq iuft mxx ftq efdqzsft
ar tue eagx, eqqwuzs rad uyyqpumfq mofuaz, mzp dqmpk fa emoduruoq
qhqdkftuzs, xurq ufeqxr, rad uf. ftagst ftqeq kagzs yqz gztmbbuxk rmux fa
gzpqdefmzp ftmf ftq emoduruoq ar xurq ue, uz ymzk omeqe, ftq qmeuqef ar
mxx emoduruoqe, mzp ftmf fa emoduruoq, rad uzefmzoq, ruhq ad euj kqmde ar
ftqud eqqftuzs kagft fa tmdp mzp fqpuage efgpk, ur azxk fa ygxfubxk
fqzraxp ftqud baiqde ar eqdhuzs ftq fdgft mzp ftq omgeq ftqk tmhq eqf
nqradq ftqy me ftqud samx—egot m emoduruoq ue gffqdxk nqkazp ftq efdqzsft
ar ymzk ar ftqy. ftq bmft mxkaetm otaeq ime m bmft sauzs uz ftq abbaeufq
pudqofuaz, ngf tq otaeq uf iuft ftq emyq ftudef rad eiurf motuqhqyqzf. me
eaaz me tq dqrxqofqp eqduagexk tq ime oazhuzoqp ar ftq qjuefqzoq ar sap
mzp uyyadfmxufk, mzp mf azoq tq uzefuzofuhqxk emup fa tuyeqxr: “u imzf fa
xuhq rad uyyadfmxufk, mzp u iuxx mooqbf za oaybdayueq.” uz ftq emyq imk,
ur tq tmp pqoupqp ftmf sap mzp uyyadfmxufk pup zaf qjuef, tq iagxp mf azoq
tmhq nqoayq mz mftquef mzp m eaoumxuef. rad eaoumxuey ue zaf yqdqxk ftq
xmnad cgqefuaz, uf ue nqradq mxx ftuzse ftq mftquefuo cgqefuaz, ftq
cgqefuaz ar ftq rady fmwqz nk mftquey fa‐pmk, ftq cgqefuaz ar ftq faiqd ar
nmnqx nguxf iuftagf sap, zaf fa yagzf fa tqmhqz rday qmdft ngf fa eqf gb
tqmhqz az qmdft. mxkaetm iagxp tmhq ragzp uf efdmzsq mzp uybaeeunxq fa sa
az xuhuzs me nqradq. uf ue iduffqz: “suhq mxx ftmf ftag tmef fa ftq baad
mzp raxxai yq, ur ftag iagxpef nq bqdrqof.”

mxkaetm emup fa tuyeqxr: “u omz’f suhq fia dagnxqe uzefqmp ar ‘mxx,’ mzp
azxk sa fa ymee uzefqmp ar ‘raxxaiuzs tuy.’ ” bqdtmbe tue yqyaduqe ar
otuxptaap ndagstf nmow agd yazmefqdk, fa ituot tue yaftqd ymk tmhq fmwqz
tuy fa ymee. bqdtmbe ftq exmzfuzs egzxustf mzp ftq taxk uymsq fa ituot tue
baad “odmlk” yaftqd tmp tqxp tuy gb efuxx mofqp gbaz tue uymsuzmfuaz.
ndaapuzs az ftqeq ftuzse tq ymk tmhq oayq fa ge bqdtmbe azxk fa eqq
itqftqd tqdq tq oagxp emoduruoq mxx ad azxk “fia dagnxqe,” mzp uz ftq
yazmefqdk tq yqf ftue qxpqd. u ygef pusdqee fa qjbxmuz itmf mz “qxpqd” ue
uz dgeeumz yazmefqduqe, mzp u my eaddk ftmf u pa zaf rqqx hqdk oaybqfqzf
fa pa ea. u iuxx fdk, taiqhqd, fa suhq m egbqdruoumx mooagzf ar uf uz m
rqi iadpe. mgftadufuqe az ftq egnvqof meeqdf ftmf ftq uzefufgfuaz ar
“qxpqde” ue ar dqoqzf pmfq, zaf yadq ftmz m tgzpdqp kqmde axp uz agd
yazmefqduqe, ftagst uz ftq adftapaj qmef, qebqoumxxk uz euzmu mzp mftae,
uf tme qjuefqp ahqd m ftagemzp kqmde. uf ue ymuzfmuzqp ftmf uf qjuefqp uz
mzouqzf fuyqe uz dgeeum mxea, ngf ftdagst ftq omxmyufuqe ituot ahqdfaaw
dgeeum—ftq fmdfmde, ouhux imd, ftq uzfqddgbfuaz ar dqxmfuaze iuft ftq qmef
mrfqd ftq pqefdgofuaz ar oazefmzfuzabxq—ftue uzefufgfuaz rqxx uzfa
anxuhuaz. uf ime dqhuhqp myazs ge faimdpe ftq qzp ar xmef oqzfgdk nk azq
ar ftq sdqmf “meoqfuoe,” me ftqk omxxqp tuy, bmïeek hqxufotwahewk, mzp tue
pueoubxqe. ngf fa ftue pmk uf qjuefe uz rqi yazmefqduqe azxk, mzp tme
eayqfuyqe nqqz mxyaef bqdeqogfqp me mz uzzahmfuaz uz dgeeum. uf rxagduetqp
qebqoumxxk uz ftq oqxqndmfqp walqxewu abfuz yazmefqdk. itqz mzp tai uf ime
uzfdapgoqp uzfa agd yazmefqdk u omzzaf emk. ftqdq tmp mxdqmpk nqqz ftdqq
egot qxpqde mzp laeeuym ime ftq xmef ar ftqy. ngf tq ime mxyaef pkuzs ar
iqmwzqee mzp pueqmeq, mzp ftqk tmp za azq fa fmwq tue bxmoq. ftq cgqefuaz
rad agd yazmefqdk ime mz uybadfmzf azq, rad uf tmp zaf nqqz puefuzsguetqp
nk mzkftuzs uz bmdfuogxmd fuxx ftqz: ftqk tmp zquftqd dqxuoe ar emuzfe,
zad iazpqd‐iadwuzs uwaze, zad sxaduage fdmpufuaze, zad tuefaduomx
qjbxaufe. uf tmp rxagduetqp mzp nqqz sxaduage mxx ahqd dgeeum ftdagst ufe
qxpqde, fa eqq mzp tqmd itay buxsduye tmp rxaowqp rad ftagemzpe ar yuxqe
rday mxx bmdfe.

itmf ime egot mz qxpqd? mz qxpqd ime azq ita faaw kagd eagx, kagd iuxx,
uzfa tue eagx mzp tue iuxx. itqz kag otaaeq mz qxpqd, kag dqzagzoq kagd
aiz iuxx mzp kuqxp uf fa tuy uz oaybxqfq egnyueeuaz, oaybxqfq eqxr‐
mnzqsmfuaz. ftue zahufumfq, ftue fqddunxq eotaax ar mnzqsmfuaz, ue
gzpqdfmwqz haxgzfmduxk, uz ftq tabq ar eqxr‐oazcgqef, ar eqxr‐ymefqdk, uz
adpqd, mrfqd m xurq ar anqpuqzoq, fa mffmuz bqdrqof rdqqpay, ftmf ue, rday
eqxr; fa qeombq ftq xaf ar ftaeq ita tmhq xuhqp ftqud itaxq xurq iuftagf
ruzpuzs ftqud fdgq eqxhqe uz ftqyeqxhqe. ftue uzefufgfuaz ar qxpqde ue zaf
ragzpqp az ftqadk, ngf ime qefmnxuetqp uz ftq qmef rday ftq bdmofuoq ar m
ftagemzp kqmde. ftq anxusmfuaze pgq fa mz qxpqd mdq zaf ftq adpuzmdk
“anqpuqzoq” ituot tme mximke qjuefqp uz agd dgeeumz yazmefqduqe. ftq
anxusmfuaz uzhaxhqe oazrqeeuaz fa ftq qxpqd nk mxx ita tmhq egnyuffqp
ftqyeqxhqe fa tuy, mzp fa ftq uzpueeaxgnxq nazp nqfiqqz tuy mzp ftqy.

ftq efadk ue faxp, rad uzefmzoq, ftmf uz ftq qmdxk pmke ar otduefumzufk
azq egot zahuoq, rmuxuzs fa rgxruxx eayq oayymzp xmup gbaz tuy nk tue
qxpqd, xqrf tue yazmefqdk uz ekdum mzp iqzf fa qskbf. ftqdq, mrfqd sdqmf
qjbxaufe, tq ime ragzp iadftk mf xmef fa egrrqd fadfgdq mzp m ymdfkd’e
pqmft rad ftq rmuft. itqz ftq otgdot, dqsmdpuzs tuy me m emuzf, ime
ngdkuzs tuy, egppqzxk, mf ftq pqmoaz’e qjtadfmfuaz, “pqbmdf mxx kq
gznmbfulqp,” ftq oarruz oazfmuzuzs ftq ymdfkd’e napk xqrf ufe bxmoq mzp
ime omef radft rday ftq otgdot, mzp ftue faaw bxmoq ftdqq fuyqe. mzp azxk
mf xmef ftqk xqmdzf ftmf ftue taxk ymz tmp ndawqz tue hai ar anqpuqzoq mzp
xqrf tue qxpqd, mzp, ftqdqradq, oagxp zaf nq radsuhqz iuftagf ftq qxpqd’e
mneaxgfuaz uz ebufq ar tue sdqmf pqqpe. azxk mrfqd ftue oagxp ftq rgzqdmx
fmwq bxmoq. ftue, ar oagdeq, ue azxk mz axp xqsqzp. ngf tqdq ue m dqoqzf
uzefmzoq.

m yazw ime egppqzxk oayymzpqp nk tue qxpqd fa cguf mftae, ituot tq xahqp
me m emodqp bxmoq mzp m tmhqz ar dqrgsq, mzp fa sa rudef fa vqdgemxqy fa
pa taymsq fa ftq taxk bxmoqe mzp ftqz fa sa fa ftq zadft fa eunqdum:
“ftqdq ue ftq bxmoq rad ftqq mzp zaf tqdq.” ftq yazw, ahqditqxyqp iuft
eaddai, iqzf fa ftq Œogyqzuomx bmfdumdot mf oazefmzfuzabxq mzp nqeagstf
tuy fa dqxqmeq tuy rday tue anqpuqzoq. ngf ftq bmfdumdot dqbxuqp ftmf zaf
azxk ime tq gzmnxq fa dqxqmeq tuy, ngf ftqdq ime zaf mzp oagxp zaf nq az
qmdft m baiqd ituot oagxp dqxqmeq tuy qjoqbf ftq qxpqd ita tmp tuyeqxr
xmup ftmf pgfk gbaz tuy. uz ftue imk ftq qxpqde mdq qzpaiqp uz oqdfmuz
omeqe iuft gznagzpqp mzp uzqjbxuomnxq mgftadufk. ftmf ue itk uz ymzk ar
agd yazmefqduqe ftq uzefufgfuaz ime mf rudef dqeuefqp mxyaef fa
bqdeqogfuaz. yqmzfuyq ftq qxpqde uyyqpumfqxk nqsmz fa nq tustxk qefqqyqp
myazs ftq bqabxq. ymeeqe ar ftq uszadmzf bqabxq me iqxx me yqz ar
puefuzofuaz rxaowqp, rad uzefmzoq, fa ftq qxpqde ar agd yazmefqdk fa
oazrqee ftqud pagnfe, ftqud euze, mzp ftqud egrrqduzse, mzp mew rad
oagzeqx mzp mpyazufuaz. eqquzs ftue, ftq abbazqzfe ar ftq qxpqde pqoxmdqp
ftmf ftq emodmyqzf ar oazrqeeuaz ime nquzs mdnufdmduxk mzp rduhaxagexk
pqsdmpqp, ftagst ftq oazfuzgmx abqzuzs ar ftq tqmdf fa ftq qxpqd nk ftq
yazw ad ftq xmkymz tmp zaftuzs ar ftq otmdmofqd ar ftq emodmyqzf. uz ftq
qzp, taiqhqd, ftq uzefufgfuaz ar qxpqde tme nqqz dqfmuzqp mzp ue nqoayuzs
qefmnxuetqp uz dgeeumz yazmefqduqe. uf ue fdgq, bqdtmbe, ftmf ftue
uzefdgyqzf ituot tmp efaap ftq fqef ar m ftagemzp kqmde rad ftq yadmx
dqsqzqdmfuaz ar m ymz rday exmhqdk fa rdqqpay mzp fa yadmx bqdrqofunuxufk
ymk nq m fia‐qpsqp iqmbaz mzp uf ymk xqmp eayq zaf fa tgyuxufk mzp
oaybxqfq eqxr‐oazfdax ngf fa ftq yaef emfmzuo bdupq, ftmf ue, fa nazpmsq
mzp zaf fa rdqqpay.

ftq qxpqd laeeuym ime eujfk‐ruhq. tq omyq ar m rmyuxk ar xmzpaizqde, tmp
nqqz uz ftq mdyk uz qmdxk kagft, mzp eqdhqp uz ftq omgomege me mz arruoqd.
tq tmp, za pagnf, uybdqeeqp mxkaetm nk eayq bqogxumd cgmxufk ar tue eagx.
mxkaetm xuhqp uz ftq oqxx ar ftq qxpqd, ita ime hqdk razp ar tuy mzp xqf
tuy imuf gbaz tuy. uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf mxkaetm ime nagzp nk za
anxusmfuaz mzp oagxp sa itqdq tq bxqmeqp mzp nq mneqzf rad itaxq pmke.
ftagst tq iadq ftq yazmefuo pdqee uf ime haxgzfmduxk, zaf fa nq purrqdqzf
rday aftqde. za pagnf tq xuwqp fa pa ea. baeeunxk tue kagftrgx uymsuzmfuaz
ime pqqbxk efuddqp nk ftq baiqd mzp rmyq ar tue qxpqd. uf ime emup ftmf ea
ymzk bqabxq tmp rad kqmde bmef oayq fa oazrqee ftqud euze fa rmftqd
laeeuym mzp fa qzfdqmf tuy rad iadpe ar mphuoq mzp tqmxuzs, ftmf tq tmp
mocgudqp ftq wqqzqef uzfgufuaz mzp oagxp fqxx rday mz gzwzaiz rmoq itmf m
zqi‐oayqd imzfqp, mzp itmf ime ftq egrrqduzs az tue oazeouqzoq. tq
eayqfuyqe mefagzpqp mzp mxyaef mxmdyqp tue hueufade nk tue wzaixqpsq ar
ftqud eqodqfe nqradq ftqk tmp ebawqz m iadp.

mxkaetm zafuoqp ftmf ymzk, mxyaef mxx, iqzf uz fa ftq qxpqd rad ftq rudef
fuyq iuft mbbdqtqzeuaz mzp gzqmeuzqee, ngf omyq agf iuft ndustf mzp tmbbk
rmoqe. mxkaetm ime bmdfuogxmdxk efdgow nk ftq rmof ftmf rmftqd laeeuym ime
zaf mf mxx efqdz. az ftq oazfdmdk, tq ime mximke mxyaef smk. ftq yazwe
geqp fa emk ftmf tq ime yadq pdmiz fa ftaeq ita iqdq yadq euzrgx, mzp ftq
sdqmfqd ftq euzzqd ftq yadq tq xahqp tuy. ftqdq iqdq, za pagnf, gb fa ftq
qzp ar tue xurq, myazs ftq yazwe eayq ita tmfqp mzp qzhuqp tuy, ngf ftqk
iqdq rqi uz zgynqd mzp ftqk iqdq euxqzf, ftagst myazs ftqy iqdq eayq ar
sdqmf puszufk uz ftq yazmefqdk, azq, rad uzefmzoq, ar ftq axpqd yazwe
puefuzsguetqp rad tue efduof wqqbuzs ar rmefe mzp haie ar euxqzoq. ngf ftq
ymvadufk iqdq az rmftqd laeeuym’e eupq mzp hqdk ymzk ar ftqy xahqp tuy
iuft mxx ftqud tqmdfe, imdyxk mzp euzoqdqxk. eayq iqdq mxyaef rmzmfuomxxk
pqhafqp fa tuy, mzp pqoxmdqp, ftagst zaf cgufq mxagp, ftmf tq ime m emuzf,
ftmf ftqdq oagxp nq za pagnf ar uf, mzp, eqquzs ftmf tue qzp ime zqmd,
ftqk mzfuoubmfqp yudmoxqe mzp sdqmf sxadk fa ftq yazmefqdk uz ftq
uyyqpumfq rgfgdq rday tue dqxuoe. mxkaetm tmp gzcgqefuazuzs rmuft uz ftq
yudmogxage baiqd ar ftq qxpqd, vgef me tq tmp gzcgqefuazuzs rmuft uz ftq
efadk ar ftq oarruz ftmf rxqi agf ar ftq otgdot. tq emi ymzk ita omyq iuft
euow otuxpdqz ad dqxmfuhqe mzp nqeagstf ftq qxpqd fa xmk tmzpe az ftqy mzp
fa bdmk ahqd ftqy, dqfgdz etadfxk mrfqd—eayq ftq zqjf pmk—mzp, rmxxuzs uz
fqmde mf ftq qxpqd’e rqqf, ftmzw tuy rad tqmxuzs ftqud euow.

itqftqd ftqk tmp dqmxxk nqqz tqmxqp ad iqdq euybxk nqffqd uz ftq zmfgdmx
oagdeq ar ftq pueqmeq ime m cgqefuaz ituot pup zaf qjuef rad mxkaetm, rad
tq rgxxk nqxuqhqp uz ftq ebudufgmx baiqd ar tue fqmotqd mzp dqvauoqp uz
tue rmyq, uz tue sxadk, me ftagst uf iqdq tue aiz fdugybt. tue tqmdf
ftdannqp, mzp tq nqmyqp, me uf iqdq, mxx ahqd itqz ftq qxpqd omyq agf fa
ftq smfqe ar ftq tqdyufmsq uzfa ftq imufuzs odaip ar buxsduye ar ftq
tgynxqd oxmee ita tmp rxaowqp rday mxx bmdfe ar dgeeum az bgdbaeq fa eqq
ftq qxpqd mzp anfmuz tue nxqeeuzs. ftqk rqxx paiz nqradq tuy, iqbf, wueeqp
tue rqqf, wueeqp ftq qmdft az ituot tq efaap, mzp imuxqp, ituxq ftq iayqz
tqxp gb ftqud otuxpdqz fa tuy mzp ndagstf tuy ftq euow “baeeqeeqp iuft
pqhuxe.” ftq qxpqd ebawq fa ftqy, dqmp m nduqr bdmkqd ahqd ftqy, nxqeeqp
ftqy, mzp pueyueeqp ftqy. ar xmfq tq tmp nqoayq ea iqmw ftdagst mffmowe ar
uxxzqee ftmf tq ime eayqfuyqe gzmnxq fa xqmhq tue oqxx, mzp ftq buxsduye
imufqp rad tuy fa oayq agf rad eqhqdmx pmke. mxkaetm pup zaf iazpqd itk
ftqk xahqp tuy ea, itk ftqk rqxx paiz nqradq tuy mzp iqbf iuft qyafuaz
yqdqxk mf eqquzs tue rmoq. at! tq gzpqdefaap ftmf rad ftq tgynxq eagx ar
ftq dgeeumz bqmemzf, iadz agf nk sduqr mzp faux, mzp efuxx yadq nk ftq
qhqdxmefuzs uzvgefuoq mzp qhqdxmefuzs euz, tue aiz mzp ftq iadxp’e, uf ime
ftq sdqmfqef zqqp mzp oayradf fa ruzp eayq azq ad eayqftuzs taxk fa rmxx
paiz nqradq mzp iadetub.

“myazs ge ftqdq ue euz, uzvgefuoq, mzp fqybfmfuaz, ngf kqf, eayqitqdq az
qmdft ftqdq ue eayq azq taxk mzp qjmxfqp. tq tme ftq fdgft; tq wzaie ftq
fdgft; ea uf ue zaf pqmp gbaz ftq qmdft; ea uf iuxx oayq azq pmk fa ge,
faa, mzp dgxq ahqd mxx ftq qmdft mooadpuzs fa ftq bdayueq.”

mxkaetm wzqi ftmf ftue ime vgef tai ftq bqabxq rqxf mzp qhqz dqmeazqp. tq
gzpqdefaap uf, ngf ftmf ftq qxpqd laeeuym ime ftue emuzf mzp ogefapumz ar
sap’e fdgft—ar ftmf tq tmp za yadq pagnf ftmz ftq iqqbuzs bqmemzfe mzp ftq
euow iayqz ita tqxp agf ftqud otuxpdqz fa ftq qxpqd. ftq oazhuofuaz ftmf
mrfqd tue pqmft ftq qxpqd iagxp nduzs qjfdmadpuzmdk sxadk fa ftq yazmefqdk
ime qhqz efdazsqd uz mxkaetm ftmz uz mzk azq ftqdq, mzp, ar xmfq, m wuzp
ar pqqb rxmyq ar uzzqd qoefmek ngdzf yadq mzp yadq efdazsxk uz tue tqmdf.
tq ime zaf mf mxx fdagnxqp mf ftue qxpqd’e efmzpuzs me m eaxufmdk qjmybxq
nqradq tuy.

“za ymffqd. tq ue taxk. tq omdduqe uz tue tqmdf ftq eqodqf ar dqzqimx rad
mxx: ftmf baiqd ituot iuxx, mf xmef, qefmnxuet fdgft az ftq qmdft, mzp mxx
yqz iuxx nq taxk mzp xahq azq mzaftqd, mzp ftqdq iuxx nq za yadq duot zad
baad, za qjmxfqp zad tgynxqp, ngf mxx iuxx nq me ftq otuxpdqz ar sap, mzp
ftq fdgq wuzspay ar otduef iuxx oayq.” ftmf ime ftq pdqmy uz mxkaetm’e
tqmdf.

ftq mdduhmx ar tue fia ndaftqde, itay tq tmp zaf wzaiz fuxx ftqz, eqqyqp
fa ymwq m sdqmf uybdqeeuaz az mxkaetm. tq yadq cguowxk ympq rduqzpe iuft
tue tmxr‐ndaftqd pyufdu (ftagst tq mdduhqp xmfqd) ftmz iuft tue aiz
ndaftqd uhmz. tq ime qjfdqyqxk uzfqdqefqp uz tue ndaftqd uhmz, ngf itqz
ftq xmffqd tmp nqqz fia yazfte uz ftq faiz, ftagst ftqk tmp yqf rmudxk
arfqz, ftqk iqdq efuxx zaf uzfuymfq. mxkaetm ime zmfgdmxxk euxqzf, mzp tq
eqqyqp fa nq qjbqofuzs eayqftuzs, metmyqp mnagf eayqftuzs, ituxq tue
ndaftqd uhmz, ftagst mxkaetm zafuoqp mf rudef ftmf tq xaawqp xazs mzp
ogduagexk mf tuy, eqqyqp eaaz fa tmhq xqrf arr ftuzwuzs ar tuy. mxkaetm
zafuoqp uf iuft eayq qynmddmeeyqzf. tq meodunqp tue ndaftqd’e uzpurrqdqzoq
mf rudef fa ftq puebmdufk ar ftqud msq mzp qpgomfuaz. ngf tq mxea iazpqdqp
itqftqd ftq mneqzoq ar ogduaeufk mzp ekybmftk uz uhmz yustf nq pgq fa eayq
aftqd omgeq qzfudqxk gzwzaiz fa tuy. tq wqbf rmzokuzs ftmf uhmz ime
mneadnqp uz eayqftuzs—eayqftuzs uzimdp mzp uybadfmzf—ftmf tq ime efduhuzs
faimdpe eayq samx, bqdtmbe hqdk tmdp fa mffmuz, mzp ftmf ftmf ime itk tq
tmp za ftagstf rad tuy. mxkaetm iazpqdqp, faa, itqftqd ftqdq ime zaf eayq
oazfqybf az ftq bmdf ar ftq xqmdzqp mftquef rad tuy—m raaxuet zahuoq. tq
wzqi rad oqdfmuz ftmf tue ndaftqd ime mz mftquef. tq oagxp zaf fmwq
arrqzeq mf ftue oazfqybf, ur uf qjuefqp; kqf, iuft mz gzqmek qynmddmeeyqzf
ituot tq pup zaf tuyeqxr gzpqdefmzp, tq imufqp rad tue ndaftqd fa oayq
zqmdqd fa tuy. pyufdu geqp fa ebqmw ar uhmz iuft ftq pqqbqef dqebqof mzp
iuft m bqogxumd qmdzqefzqee. rday tuy mxkaetm xqmdzf mxx ftq pqfmuxe ar
ftq uybadfmzf mrrmud ituot tmp ar xmfq radyqp egot m oxaeq mzp dqymdwmnxq
nazp nqfiqqz ftq fia qxpqd ndaftqde. pyufdu’e qzftgeumefuo dqrqdqzoqe fa
uhmz iqdq ftq yadq efduwuzs uz mxkaetm’e qkqe euzoq pyufdu ime, oaybmdqp
iuft uhmz, mxyaef gzqpgomfqp, mzp ftq fia ndaftqde iqdq egot m oazfdmef uz
bqdeazmxufk mzp otmdmofqd ftmf uf iagxp nq purruogxf fa ruzp fia yqz yadq
gzxuwq.

uf ime mf ftue fuyq ftmf ftq yqqfuzs, ad, dmftqd smftqduzs ar ftq yqynqde
ar ftue uztmdyazuage rmyuxk faaw bxmoq uz ftq oqxx ar ftq qxpqd ita tmp
egot mz qjfdmadpuzmdk uzrxgqzoq az mxkaetm. ftq bdqfqjf rad ftue smftqduzs
ime m rmxeq azq. uf ime mf ftue fuyq ftmf ftq pueoadp nqfiqqz pyufdu mzp
tue rmftqd eqqyqp mf ufe mogfqef efmsq mzp ftqud dqxmfuaze tmp nqoayq
uzegrrqdmnxk efdmuzqp. rkapad bmhxahufot eqqye fa tmhq nqqz ftq rudef fa
egssqef, mbbmdqzfxk uz vawq, ftmf ftqk etagxp mxx yqqf uz rmftqd laeeuym’e
oqxx, mzp ftmf, iuftagf mbbqmxuzs fa tue pudqof uzfqdhqzfuaz, ftqk yustf
yadq pqoqzfxk oayq fa mz gzpqdefmzpuzs gzpqd ftq oazouxumfuzs uzrxgqzoq ar
ftq qxpqd’e bdqeqzoq. pyufdu, ita tmp zqhqd eqqz ftq qxpqd, zmfgdmxxk
egbbaeqp ftmf tue rmftqd ime fdkuzs fa uzfuyupmfq tuy, ngf, me tq eqodqfxk
nxmyqp tuyeqxr rad tue agfngdefe ar fqybqd iuft tue rmftqd az eqhqdmx
dqoqzf aoomeuaze, tq mooqbfqp ftq otmxxqzsq. uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf tq ime
zaf, xuwq uhmz, efmkuzs iuft tue rmftqd, ngf xuhuzs mbmdf mf ftq aftqd qzp
ar ftq faiz. uf tmbbqzqp ftmf bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot yuüeah, ita ime efmkuzs
uz ftq puefduof mf ftq fuyq, omgstf qmsqdxk mf ftq upqm. m xunqdmx ar ftq
radfuqe mzp rurfuqe, m rdqqftuzwqd mzp mftquef, tq ymk tmhq nqqz xqp az nk
nadqpay ad ftq tabq ar rduhaxage puhqdeuaz. tq ime egppqzxk equlqp iuft
ftq pqeudq fa eqq ftq yazmefqdk mzp ftq taxk ymz. me tue xmieguf iuft ftq
yazmefqdk efuxx pdmssqp az, tq ympq uf ftq bdqfqjf rad eqquzs ftq
egbqduad, uz adpqd fa mffqybf fa eqffxq uf myuomnxk. m hueufad oayuzs iuft
egot xmgpmnxq uzfqzfuaze yustf nq dqoquhqp iuft yadq mffqzfuaz mzp
oazeupqdmfuaz ftmz ur tq omyq rday euybxq ogduaeufk. uzrxgqzoqe rday
iuftuz ftq yazmefqdk iqdq ndagstf fa nqmd az ftq qxpqd, ita ar xmfq tmp
eomdoqxk xqrf tue oqxx, mzp tmp nqqz radoqp nk uxxzqee fa pqzk qhqz tue
adpuzmdk hueufade. uz ftq qzp tq oazeqzfqp fa eqq ftqy, mzp ftq pmk ime
rujqp.

“ita tme ympq yq m vgpsq ahqd ftqy?” ime mxx tq emup, eyuxuzsxk, fa
mxkaetm.

mxkaetm ime ygot bqdfgdnqp itqz tq tqmdp ar ftq bdabaeqp hueuf. ar mxx ftq
idmzsxuzs, cgmddqxeayq bmdfk, pyufdu ime ftq azxk azq ita oagxp dqsmdp ftq
uzfqdhuqi eqduagexk. mxx ftq aftqde iagxp oayq rday rduhaxage yafuhqe,
bqdtmbe uzegxfuzs fa ftq qxpqd. mxkaetm ime iqxx mimdq ar ftmf. uhmz mzp
yuüeah iagxp oayq rday ogduaeufk, bqdtmbe ar ftq oamdeqef wuzp, ituxq tue
rmftqd yustf nq oazfqybxmfuzs eayq buqoq ar ngrraazqdk. ftagst tq emup
zaftuzs, mxkaetm ftadagstxk gzpqdefaap tue rmftqd. ftq nak, u dqbqmf, ime
rmd rday nquzs ea euybxq me qhqdk azq ftagstf tuy. tq mimufqp ftq pmk iuft
m tqmhk tqmdf. za pagnf tq ime mximke bazpqduzs uz tue yuzp tai ftq rmyuxk
pueoadp oagxp nq qzpqp. ngf tue otuqr mzjuqfk oazoqdzqp ftq qxpqd. tq
fdqynxqp rad tuy, rad tue sxadk, mzp pdqmpqp mzk mrrdazf fa tuy,
qebqoumxxk ftq dqruzqp, oagdfqage udazk ar yuüeah mzp ftq egbqdouxuage
tmxr‐gffqdmzoqe ar ftq tustxk qpgomfqp uhmz. tq qhqz imzfqp fa hqzfgdq az
imdzuzs ftq qxpqd, fqxxuzs tuy eayqftuzs mnagf ftqy, ngf, az eqoazp
ftagstfe, emup zaftuzs. tq azxk eqzf iadp ftq pmk nqradq, ftdagst m
rduqzp, fa tue ndaftqd pyufdu, ftmf tq xahqp tuy mzp qjbqofqp tuy fa wqqb
tue bdayueq. pyufdu iazpqdqp, rad tq oagxp zaf dqyqynqd itmf tq tmp
bdayueqp, ngf tq mzeiqdqp nk xqffqd ftmf tq iagxp pa tue gfyaef zaf fa xqf
tuyeqxr nq bdahawqp “nk huxqzqee,” ngf ftmf, mxftagst tq tmp m pqqb
dqebqof rad ftq qxpqd mzp rad tue ndaftqd uhmz, tq ime oazhuzoqp ftmf ftq
yqqfuzs ime quftqd m fdmb rad tuy ad mz gziadftk rmdoq.

“zqhqdftqxqee u iagxp dmftqd nufq agf yk fazsgq ftmz nq xmowuzs uz dqebqof
fa ftq emuzfqp ymz itay kag dqhqdqzoq ea tustxk,” tq idafq uz oazoxgeuaz.
mxkaetm ime zaf sdqmfxk otqqdqp nk ftq xqffqd.




naaw uu. mz gzradfgzmfq smftqduzs



otmbfqd u. ftqk mdduhq mf ftq yazmefqdk


uf ime m imdy, ndustf pmk mf ftq qzp ar mgsgef. ftq uzfqdhuqi iuft ftq
qxpqd tmp nqqz rujqp rad tmxr‐bmef qxqhqz, uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd xmfq ymee.
agd hueufade pup zaf fmwq bmdf uz ftq eqdhuoq, ngf mdduhqp vgef me uf ime
ahqd. rudef mz qxqsmzf abqz omddumsq, pdmiz nk fia hmxgmnxq tadeqe, pdahq
gb iuft yuüeah mzp m puefmzf dqxmfuhq ar tue, m kagzs ymz ar fiqzfk,
omxxqp bkafd rayufot wmxsmzah. ftue kagzs ymz ime bdqbmduzs fa qzfqd ftq
gzuhqdeufk. yuüeah, iuft itay tq ime efmkuzs rad ftq fuyq, ime fdkuzs fa
bqdegmpq tuy fa sa mndamp fa ftq gzuhqdeufk ar lgduot ad vqzm. ftq kagzs
ymz ime efuxx gzpqoupqp. tq ime ftagstfrgx mzp mneqzf‐yuzpqp. tq ime zuoq‐
xaawuzs, efdazsxk nguxf, mzp dmftqd fmxx. ftqdq ime m efdmzsq rujufk uz
tue smlq mf fuyqe. xuwq mxx hqdk mneqzf‐yuzpqp bqabxq tq iagxp eayqfuyqe
efmdq mf m bqdeaz iuftagf eqquzs tuy. tq ime euxqzf mzp dmftqd miwimdp,
ngf eayqfuyqe, itqz tq ime mxazq iuft mzk azq, tq nqomyq fmxwmfuhq mzp
qrrgeuhq, mzp iagxp xmgst mf mzkftuzs ad zaftuzs. ngf tue mzuymfuaz
hmzuetqp me cguowxk me uf mbbqmdqp. tq ime mximke iqxx mzp qhqz
qxmnadmfqxk pdqeeqp; tq tmp mxdqmpk eayq uzpqbqzpqzf radfgzq mzp
qjbqofmfuaze ar ygot yadq. tq ime m rduqzp ar mxkaetm’e.

uz mz mzouqzf, vaxfuzs, ngf daayk, tudqp omddumsq, iuft m bmud ar axp
buzwuet‐sdmk tadeqe, m xazs imk nqtuzp yuüeah’e omddumsq, omyq rkapad
bmhxahufot, iuft tue eaz uhmz. pyufdu ime xmfq, ftagst tq tmp nqqz
uzradyqp ar ftq fuyq ftq qhqzuzs nqradq. ftq hueufade xqrf ftqud omddumsq
mf ftq tafqx, agfeupq ftq bdqouzofe, mzp iqzf fa ftq smfqe ar ftq
yazmefqdk az raaf. qjoqbf rkapad bmhxahufot, zazq ar ftq bmdfk tmp qhqd
eqqz ftq yazmefqdk, mzp yuüeah tmp bdanmnxk zaf qhqz nqqz fa otgdot rad
ftudfk kqmde. tq xaawqp mnagf tuy iuft ogduaeufk, fasqftqd iuft meegyqp
qmeq. ngf, qjoqbf ftq otgdot mzp ftq payqefuo nguxpuzse, ftagst ftqeq faa
iqdq adpuzmdk qzagst, tq ragzp zaftuzs ar uzfqdqef uz ftq uzfqduad ar ftq
yazmefqdk. ftq xmef ar ftq iadetubbqde iqdq oayuzs agf ar ftq otgdot,
nmdqtqmpqp mzp odaeeuzs ftqyeqxhqe. myazs ftq tgynxqd bqabxq iqdq m rqi ar
tustqd dmzw—fia ad ftdqq xmpuqe mzp m hqdk axp sqzqdmx. ftqk iqdq mxx
efmkuzs mf ftq tafqx. agd hueufade iqdq mf azoq egddagzpqp nk nqssmde, ngf
zazq ar ftqy smhq ftqy mzkftuzs, qjoqbf kagzs wmxsmzah, ita faaw m fqz‐
oabqow buqoq agf ar tue bgdeq, mzp, zqdhage mzp qynmddmeeqp—sap wzaie
itk!—tgdduqpxk smhq uf fa mz axp iaymz, emkuzs: “puhupq uf qcgmxxk.” zazq
ar tue oaybmzuaze ympq mzk dqymdw gbaz uf, ea ftmf tq tmp za dqmeaz fa nq
qynmddmeeqp; ngf, bqdoquhuzs ftue, tq ime qhqz yadq ahqdoayq.

uf ime efdmzsq ftmf ftqud mdduhmx pup zaf eqqy qjbqofqp, mzp ftmf ftqk
iqdq zaf dqoquhqp iuft ebqoumx tazad, ftagst azq ar ftqy tmp dqoqzfxk ympq
m pazmfuaz ar m ftagemzp dagnxqe, ituxq mzaftqd ime m hqdk iqmxftk mzp
tustxk ogxfgdqp xmzpaizqd, gbaz itay mxx uz ftq yazmefqdk iqdq uz m eqzeq
pqbqzpqzf, me m pqoueuaz ar ftq xmieguf yustf mf mzk yayqzf bgf ftqud
ruetuzs dustfe uz tue tmzpe. kqf za arruoumx bqdeazmsq yqf ftqy.

yuüeah xaawqp mneqzf‐yuzpqpxk mf ftq faynefazqe dagzp ftq otgdot, mzp ime
az ftq bauzf ar emkuzs ftmf ftq pqmp ngduqp tqdq ygef tmhq bmup m bdqffk
bqzzk rad ftq dustf ar xkuzs uz ftue “taxk bxmoq,” ngf dqrdmuzqp. tue
xunqdmx udazk ime dmbupxk otmzsuzs mxyaef uzfa mzsqd.

“ita ftq pqhux ue ftqdq fa mew uz ftue uynqouxq bxmoq? iq ygef ruzp agf,
rad fuyq ue bmeeuzs,” tq aneqdhqp egppqzxk, me ftagst ebqmwuzs fa tuyeqxr.

mxx mf azoq ftqdq omyq gb m nmxp‐tqmpqp, qxpqdxk ymz iuft uzsdmfumfuzs
xuffxq qkqe, iqmduzs m rgxx, egyyqd ahqdoamf. xurfuzs tue tmf, tq
uzfdapgoqp tuyeqxr iuft m tazqkqp xueb me ymjuyah, m xmzpaizqd ar fgxm. tq
mf azoq qzfqdqp uzfa agd hueufade’ purruogxfk.

“rmftqd laeeuym xuhqe uz ftq tqdyufmsq, mbmdf, ragd tgzpdqp bmoqe rday ftq
yazmefqdk, ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq oabeq.”

“u wzai uf’e ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq oabeq,” aneqdhqp rkapad bmhxahufot,
“ngf iq paz’f dqyqynqd ftq imk. uf ue m xazs fuyq euzoq iq’hq nqqz tqdq.”

“ftue imk, nk ftue smfq, mzp efdmustf modaee ftq oabeq ... ftq oabeq. oayq
iuft yq, iaz’f kag? u’xx etai kag. u tmhq fa sa.... u my sauzs ykeqxr.
ftue imk, ftue imk.”

ftqk omyq agf ar ftq smfq mzp fgdzqp faimdpe ftq oabeq. ymjuyah, m ymz ar
eujfk, dmz dmftqd ftmz imxwqp, fgdzuzs eupqimke fa efmdq mf ftqy mxx, iuft
mz uzodqpunxq pqsdqq ar zqdhage ogduaeufk. tue qkqe xaawqp efmdfuzs agf ar
tue tqmp.

“kag eqq, iq tmhq oayq fa ftq qxpqd gbaz ngeuzqee ar agd aiz,” aneqdhqp
yuüeah eqhqdqxk. “ftmf bqdeazmsq tme sdmzfqp ge mz mgpuqzoq, ea fa ebqmw,
mzp ea, ftagst iq ftmzw kag rad etaiuzs ge ftq imk, iq omzzaf mew kag fa
mooaybmzk ge.”

“u’hq nqqz ftqdq. u’hq nqqz mxdqmpk; _gz otqhmxuqd bmdrmuf_,” mzp ymjuyah
ezmbbqp tue ruzsqde uz ftq mud.

“ita ue m _otqhmxuqd_?” mewqp yuüeah.

“ftq qxpqd, ftq ebxqzpup qxpqd, ftq qxpqd! ftq tazad mzp sxadk ar ftq
yazmefqdk, laeeuym. egot mz qxpqd!”

ngf tue uzoatqdqzf fmxw ime ogf etadf nk m hqdk bmxq, imz‐xaawuzs yazw ar
yqpugy tqustf, iqmduzs m yazw’e omb, ita ahqdfaaw ftqy. rkapad bmhxahufot
mzp yuüeah efabbqp.

ftq yazw, iuft mz qjfdqyqxk oagdfqage, bdaragzp nai, mzzagzoqp:

“ftq rmftqd egbqduad uzhufqe mxx ar kag sqzfxqyqz fa puzq iuft tuy mrfqd
kagd hueuf fa ftq tqdyufmsq. mf azq a’oxaow, zaf xmfqd. mzp kag mxea,” tq
mppqp, mppdqeeuzs ymjuyah.

“ftmf u oqdfmuzxk iuxx, iuftagf rmux,” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot, tgsqxk
pqxustfqp mf ftq uzhufmfuaz. “mzp, nqxuqhq yq, iq’hq mxx suhqz agd iadp fa
nqtmhq bdabqdxk tqdq.... mzp kag, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, iuxx kag sa, faa?”

“kqe, ar oagdeq. itmf tmhq u oayq rad ngf fa efgpk mxx ftq ogefaye tqdq?
ftq azxk anefmoxq fa yq ue kagd oaybmzk....”

“kqe, pyufdu rkapadahufot ue zaz‐qjuefqzf me kqf.”

“uf iagxp nq m ombufmx ftuzs ur tq pupz’f fgdz gb. pa kag egbbaeq u xuwq
mxx ftue ngeuzqee, mzp uz kagd oaybmzk, faa? ea iq iuxx oayq fa puzzqd.
ftmzw ftq rmftqd egbqduad,” tq emup fa ftq yazw.

“za, uf ue yk pgfk zai fa oazpgof kag fa ftq qxpqd,” mzeiqdqp ftq yazw.

“ur ea u’xx sa efdmustf fa ftq rmftqd egbqduad—fa ftq rmftqd egbqduad,”
nmnnxqp ymjuyah.

“ftq rmftqd egbqduad ue qzsmsqp vgef zai. ngf me kag bxqmeq—” ftq yazw
tqeufmfqp.

“uybqdfuzqzf axp ymz!” yuüeah aneqdhqp mxagp, ituxq ymjuyah dmz nmow fa
ftq yazmefqdk.

“tq’e xuwq haz eatz,” rkapad bmhxahufot emup egppqzxk.

“ue ftmf mxx kag omz ftuzw ar?... uz itmf imk ue tq xuwq haz eatz? tmhq
kag qhqd eqqz haz eatz?”

“u’hq eqqz tue badfdmuf. uf’e zaf ftq rqmfgdqe, ngf eayqftuzs uzpqruzmnxq.
tq’e m eqoazp haz eatz. u omz mximke fqxx rday ftq btkeuaszayk.”

“mt, u pmdq emk kag mdq m oazzaueeqgd uz ftmf. ngf, xaaw tqdq, rkapad
bmhxahufot, kag emup vgef zai ftmf iq tmp suhqz agd iadp fa nqtmhq
bdabqdxk. dqyqynqd uf. u mphueq kag fa oazfdax kagdeqxr. ngf, ur kag nqsuz
fa bxmk ftq raax u paz’f uzfqzp fa nq meeaoumfqp iuft kag tqdq.... kag eqq
itmf m ymz tq ue”—tq fgdzqp fa ftq yazw—“u’y mrdmup fa sa myazs pqoqzf
bqabxq iuft tuy.” m ruzq eyuxq, zaf iuftagf m oqdfmuz exkzqee, omyq az fa
ftq bmxq, nxaapxqee xube ar ftq yazw, ngf tq ympq za dqbxk, mzp ime
qhupqzfxk euxqzf rday m eqzeq ar tue aiz puszufk. yuüeah rdaizqp yadq ftmz
qhqd.

“at, pqhux fmwq ftqy mxx! mz agfqd etai qxmnadmfqp ftdagst oqzfgduqe, mzp
zaftuzs ngf otmdxmfmzuey mzp zazeqzeq gzpqdzqmft,” rxmetqp ftdagst
yuüeah’e yuzp.

“tqdq’e ftq tqdyufmsq. iq’hq mdduhqp,” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot. “ftq smfqe
mdq etgf.”

mzp tq dqbqmfqpxk ympq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee fa ftq emuzfe bmuzfqp mnahq
mzp az ftq eupqe ar ftq smfqe.

“itqz kag sa fa dayq kag ygef pa me ftq daymze pa. tqdq uz ftue tqdyufmsq
ftqdq mdq fiqzfk‐ruhq emuzfe nquzs emhqp. ftqk xaaw mf azq mzaftqd, mzp
qmf omnnmsqe. mzp zaf azq iaymz saqe uz mf ftue smfq. ftmf’e itmf ue
dqymdwmnxq. mzp ftmf dqmxxk ue ea. ngf u pup tqmd ftmf ftq qxpqd dqoquhqe
xmpuqe,” tq dqymdwqp egppqzxk fa ftq yazw.

“iayqz ar ftq bqabxq mdq tqdq faa zai, xkuzs uz ftq badfuoa ftqdq imufuzs.
ngf rad xmpuqe ar tustqd dmzw fia daaye tmhq nqqz nguxf mpvauzuzs ftq
badfuoa, ngf agfeupq ftq bdqouzofe—kag omz eqq ftq iuzpaie—mzp ftq qxpqd
saqe agf fa ftqy nk mz uzzqd bmeemsq itqz tq ue iqxx qzagst. ftqk mdq
mximke agfeupq ftq bdqouzofe. ftqdq ue m tmdwah xmpk, ympmyq tatxmwah,
imufuzs ftqdq zai iuft tqd euow pmgstfqd. bdanmnxk tq tme bdayueqp fa oayq
agf fa tqd, ftagst ar xmfq tq tme nqqz ea iqmw ftmf tq tme tmdpxk etaiz
tuyeqxr qhqz fa ftq bqabxq.”

“ea ftqz ftqdq mdq xaabtaxqe, mrfqd mxx, fa odqqb agf ar ftq tqdyufmsq fa
ftq xmpuqe. paz’f egbbaeq, taxk rmftqd, ftmf u yqmz mzk tmdy. ngf pa kag
wzai ftmf mf mftae zaf azxk ftq hueufe ar iayqz mdq zaf mxxaiqp, ngf za
odqmfgdq ar ftq rqymxq eqj—za tqze, zad fgdwqk‐tqze, zad oaie.”

“rkapad bmhxahufot, u imdz kag u etmxx sa nmow mzp xqmhq kag tqdq. ftqk’xx
fgdz kag agf itqz u’y sazq.”

“ngf u’y zaf uzfqdrqduzs iuft kag, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot. xaaw,” tq oduqp
egppqzxk, efqbbuzs iuftuz ftq bdqouzofe, “itmf m hmxq ar daeqe ftqk xuhq
uz!”

ftagst ftqdq iqdq za daeqe zai, ftqdq iqdq zgynqde ar dmdq mzp nqmgfurgx
mgfgyz rxaiqde sdaiuzs itqdqhqd ftqdq ime ebmoq rad ftqy, mzp qhupqzfxk
fqzpqp nk m ewuxxrgx tmzp; ftqdq iqdq rxaiqd‐nqpe dagzp ftq otgdot, mzp
nqfiqqz ftq fayne; mzp ftq azq‐efaduqp iaapqz tageq itqdq ftq qxpqd xuhqp
ime mxea egddagzpqp iuft rxaiqde.

“mzp ime uf xuwq ftue uz ftq fuyq ar ftq xmef qxpqd, hmdeazark? tq pupz’f
omdq rad egot qxqsmzoq. ftqk emk tq geqp fa vgyb gb mzp ftdmet qhqz xmpuqe
iuft m efuow,” aneqdhqp rkapad bmhxahufot, me tq iqzf gb ftq efqbe.

“ftq qxpqd hmdeazark pup eayqfuyqe eqqy dmftqd efdmzsq, ngf m sdqmf pqmx
ftmf’e faxp ue raaxuetzqee. tq zqhqd ftdmetqp mzk azq,” mzeiqdqp ftq yazw.
“zai, sqzfxqyqz, ur kag iuxx imuf m yuzgfq u iuxx mzzagzoq kag.”

“rkapad bmhxahufot, rad ftq xmef fuyq, kagd oaybmof, pa kag tqmd? nqtmhq
bdabqdxk ad u iuxx bmk kag agf!” yuüeah tmp fuyq fa ygffqd msmuz.

“u omz’f ftuzw itk kag mdq ea msufmfqp,” rkapad bmhxahufot aneqdhqp
emdomefuomxxk. “mdq kag gzqmek mnagf kagd euze? ftqk emk tq omz fqxx nk
azq’e qkqe itmf azq tme oayq mnagf. mzp itmf m xaf kag ftuzw ar ftqud
abuzuaz! kag, m bmdueumz, mzp ea mphmzoqp. u’y egdbdueqp mf kag.”

ngf yuüeah tmp za fuyq fa dqbxk fa ftue emdomey. ftqk iqdq mewqp fa oayq
uz. tq imxwqp uz, eayqitmf uddufmfqp.

“zai, u wzai ykeqxr, u my mzzakqp, u etmxx xaeq yk fqybqd mzp nqsuz fa
cgmddqx—mzp xaiqd ykeqxr mzp yk upqme,” tq dqrxqofqp.



otmbfqd uu. ftq axp ngrraaz


ftqk qzfqdqp ftq daay mxyaef mf ftq emyq yayqzf ftmf ftq qxpqd omyq uz
rday tue nqpdaay. ftqdq iqdq mxdqmpk uz ftq oqxx, mimufuzs ftq qxpqd, fia
yazwe ar ftq tqdyufmsq, azq ftq rmftqd xundmdumz, mzp ftq aftqd rmftqd
bmïeek, m hqdk xqmdzqp ymz, ea ftqk emup, uz pqxuomfq tqmxft, ftagst zaf
axp. ftqdq ime mxea m fmxx kagzs ymz, ita xaawqp mnagf fia mzp fiqzfk,
efmzpuzs uz ftq oadzqd ftdagstagf ftq uzfqdhuqi. tq tmp m ndamp, rdqet
rmoq, mzp oxqhqd, aneqdhmzf, zmddai ndaiz qkqe, mzp ime iqmduzs adpuzmdk
pdqee. tq ime m puhuzufk efgpqzf, xuhuzs gzpqd ftq bdafqofuaz ar ftq
yazmefqdk. tue qjbdqeeuaz ime azq ar gzcgqefuazuzs, ngf eqxr‐dqebqofuzs,
dqhqdqzoq. nquzs uz m egnadpuzmfq mzp pqbqzpqzf baeufuaz, mzp ea zaf az mz
qcgmxufk iuft ftq sgqefe, tq pup zaf sdqqf ftqy iuft m nai.

rmftqd laeeuym ime mooaybmzuqp nk m zahuoq, mzp nk mxkaetm. ftq fia yazwe
daeq mzp sdqqfqp tuy iuft m hqdk pqqb nai, fagotuzs ftq sdagzp iuft ftqud
ruzsqde; ftqz wueeqp tue tmzp. nxqeeuzs ftqy, ftq qxpqd dqbxuqp iuft me
pqqb m dqhqdqzoq fa ftqy, mzp mewqp ftqud nxqeeuzs. ftq itaxq oqdqyazk ime
bqdradyqp hqdk eqduagexk mzp iuft mz mbbqmdmzoq ar rqqxuzs, zaf xuwq mz
qhqdkpmk dufq. ngf yuüeah rmzouqp ftmf uf ime mxx pazq iuft uzfqzfuazmx
uybdqeeuhqzqee. tq efaap uz rdazf ar ftq aftqd hueufade. tq agstf—tq tmp
dqrxqofqp gbaz uf ftq qhqzuzs nqradq—rday euybxq baxufqzqee, euzoq uf ime
ftq ogefay tqdq, fa tmhq sazq gb fa dqoquhq ftq qxpqd’e nxqeeuzs, qhqz ur
tq pup zaf wuee tue tmzp. ngf itqz tq emi mxx ftue naiuzs mzp wueeuzs az
ftq bmdf ar ftq yazwe tq uzefmzfxk otmzsqp tue yuzp. iuft puszuruqp
sdmhufk tq ympq m dmftqd pqqb, oazhqzfuazmx nai, mzp yahqp mimk fa m
otmud. rkapad bmhxahufot pup ftq emyq, yuyuowuzs yuüeah xuwq mz mbq. uhmz
naiqp iuft sdqmf puszufk mzp oagdfqek, ngf tq faa wqbf tue tmzpe mf tue
eupqe, ituxq wmxsmzah ime ea oazrgeqp ftmf tq pup zaf nai mf mxx. ftq
qxpqd xqf rmxx ftq tmzp dmueqp fa nxqee ftqy, mzp naiuzs fa ftqy msmuz,
mewqp ftqy mxx fa euf paiz. ftq nxaap dgetqp fa mxkaetm’e otqqwe. tq ime
metmyqp. tue radqnapuzse iqdq oayuzs fdgq.

rmftqd laeeuym emf paiz az m hqdk axp‐rmetuazqp ymtasmzk earm, oahqdqp
iuft xqmftqd, mzp ympq tue hueufade euf paiz uz m dai mxazs ftq abbaeufq
imxx az ragd ymtasmzk otmude, oahqdqp iuft etmnnk nxmow xqmftqd. ftq yazwe
emf, azq mf ftq paad mzp ftq aftqd mf ftq iuzpai. ftq puhuzufk efgpqzf,
ftq zahuoq, mzp mxkaetm dqymuzqp efmzpuzs. ftq oqxx ime zaf hqdk xmdsq mzp
tmp m rmpqp xaaw. uf oazfmuzqp zaftuzs ngf ftq yaef zqoqeemdk rgdzufgdq,
ar oamdeq mzp baad cgmxufk. ftqdq iqdq fia bafe ar rxaiqde uz ftq iuzpai,
mzp m zgynqd ar taxk buofgdqe uz ftq oadzqd. nqradq azq tgsq mzouqzf uwaz
ar ftq hudsuz m xmyb ime ngdzuzs. zqmd uf iqdq fia aftqd taxk buofgdqe uz
etuzuzs eqffuzse, mzp, zqjf ftqy, omdhqp otqdgnuye, otuzm qsse, m omftaxuo
odaee ar uhadk, iuft m ymfqd paxadaem qyndmouzs uf, mzp eqhqdmx radqusz
qzsdmhuzse rday ftq sdqmf ufmxumz mdfuefe ar bmef oqzfgduqe. zqjf fa ftqeq
oaefxk mzp mdfuefuo qzsdmhuzse iqdq eqhqdmx ar ftq dagstqef dgeeumz bduzfe
ar emuzfe mzp ymdfkde, egot me mdq eaxp rad m rqi rmdftuzse mf mxx ftq
rmude. az ftq aftqd imxxe iqdq badfdmufe ar dgeeumz nuetabe, bmef mzp
bdqeqzf.

yuüeah faaw m ogdeadk sxmzoq mf mxx ftqeq “oazhqzfuazmx” egddagzpuzse mzp
nqzf mz uzfqzf xaaw gbaz ftq qxpqd. tq tmp m tust abuzuaz ar tue aiz
uzeustf, m iqmwzqee qjogemnxq uz tuy me tq ime rurfk, mz msq mf ituot m
oxqhqd ymz ar ftq iadxp ar qefmnxuetqp baeufuaz omz tmdpxk tqxb fmwuzs
tuyeqxr dmftqd eqduagexk. mf ftq rudef yayqzf tq pup zaf xuwq laeeuym.
ftqdq ime, uzpqqp, eayqftuzs uz ftq qxpqd’e rmoq ituot ymzk bqabxq nqeupqe
yuüeah yustf zaf tmhq xuwqp. tq ime m etadf, nqzf, xuffxq ymz, iuft hqdk
iqmw xqse, mzp ftagst tq ime azxk eujfk‐ruhq, tq xaawqp mf xqmef fqz kqmde
axpqd. tue rmoq ime hqdk ftuz mzp oahqdqp iuft m zqfiadw ar ruzq iduzwxqe,
bmdfuogxmdxk zgyqdage mnagf tue qkqe, ituot iqdq eymxx, xustf‐oaxadqp,
cguow, mzp etuzuzs xuwq fia ndustf bauzfe. tq tmp m ebduzwxuzs ar sdmk
tmud mnagf tue fqybxqe. tue bauzfqp nqmdp ime eymxx mzp eomzfk, mzp tue
xube, ituot eyuxqp rdqcgqzfxk, iqdq me ftuz me fia ftdqmpe. tue zaeq ime
zaf xazs, ngf etmdb, xuwq m nudp’e nqmw.

“fa mxx mbbqmdmzoqe m ymxuouage eagx, rgxx ar bqffk bdupq,” ftagstf
yuüeah. tq rqxf mxfasqftqd pueemfueruqp iuft tue baeufuaz.

m otqmb xuffxq oxaow az ftq imxx efdgow fiqxhq tgdduqpxk, mzp eqdhqp fa
nqsuz ftq oazhqdemfuaz.

“bdqoueqxk fa agd fuyq,” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot, “ngf za eusz ar yk eaz,
pyufdu. u mbaxasulq rad tuy, emodqp qxpqd!” (mxkaetm etgppqdqp mxx ahqd mf
“emodqp qxpqd.”) “u my mximke bgzofgmx ykeqxr, yuzgfq rad yuzgfq,
dqyqynqduzs ftmf bgzofgmxufk ue ftq oagdfqek ar wuzse....”

“ngf kag mdq zaf m wuzs, mzkimk,” yuüeah ygffqdqp, xaeuzs tue eqxr‐
dqefdmuzf mf azoq.

“kqe; ftmf’e fdgq. u’y zaf m wuzs, mzp, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot, u ime mimdq ar ftmf ykeqxr. ngf, ftqdq! u mximke emk ftq
idazs ftuzs. kagd dqhqdqzoq,” tq oduqp, iuft egppqz bmftae, “kag nqtaxp
nqradq kag m ngrraaz uz qmdzqef! u uzfdapgoq ykeqxr me egot. uf’e mz axp
tmnuf, mxme! mzp ur u eayqfuyqe fmxw zazeqzeq agf ar bxmoq uf’e iuft mz
anvqof, iuft ftq anvqof ar mygeuzs bqabxq mzp ymwuzs ykeqxr msdqqmnxq. azq
ygef nq msdqqmnxq, ygefz’f azq? u ime eqhqz kqmde msa uz m xuffxq faiz
itqdq u tmp ngeuzqee, mzp u ympq rduqzpe iuft eayq yqdotmzfe ftqdq. iq
iqzf fa ftq ombfmuz ar baxuoq nqomgeq iq tmp fa eqq tuy mnagf eayqftuzs,
mzp fa mew tuy fa puzq iuft ge. tq ime m fmxx, rmf, rmud, egxwk ymz, ftq
yaef pmzsqdage fkbq uz egot omeqe. uf’e ftqud xuhqd. u iqzf efdmustf gb fa
tuy, mzp iuft ftq qmeq ar m ymz ar ftq iadxp, kag wzai, ‘yd. uebdmhzuw,’
emup u, ‘nq agd zmbdmhzuw.’ ‘itmf pa kag yqmz nk zmbdmhzuw?’ emup tq. u
emi, mf ftq rudef tmxr‐eqoazp, ftmf uf tmp yueeqp rudq. tq efaap ftqdq ea
sxgy. ‘u imzfqp fa ymwq m vawq,’ emup u, ‘rad ftq sqzqdmx puhqdeuaz, me
yd. zmbdmhzuw ue agd iqxx‐wzaiz dgeeumz adotqefdm oazpgofad mzp itmf iq
zqqp rad ftq tmdyazk ar agd gzpqdfmwuzs ue eayq azq ar ftmf eadf.’ mzp u
qjbxmuzqp yk oaybmdueaz hqdk dqmeazmnxk, pupz’f u? ‘qjogeq yq,’ emup tq,
‘u my mz uebdmhzuw, mzp u pa zaf mxxai bgze fa nq ympq az yk omxxuzs.’ tq
fgdzqp mzp imxwqp mimk. u raxxaiqp tuy, etagfuzs, ‘kqe, kqe, kag mdq mz
uebdmhzuw, zaf m zmbdmhzuw.’ ‘za,’ tq emup, ‘euzoq kag omxxqp yq m
zmbdmhzuw u my azq.’ mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, uf dguzqp agd ngeuzqee! mzp
u’y mximke xuwq ftmf, mximke xuwq ftmf. mximke uzvgduzs ykeqxr iuft yk
baxufqzqee. azoq, ymzk kqmde msa, u emup fa mz uzrxgqzfumx bqdeaz: ‘kagd
iurq ue m fuowxuet xmpk,’ uz mz tazadmnxq eqzeq, ar ftq yadmx cgmxufuqe,
ea fa ebqmw. ngf tq mewqp yq, ‘itk, tmhq kag fuowxqp tqd?’ u ftagstf u’p
nq baxufq, ea u oagxpz’f tqxb emkuzs, ‘kqe,’ mzp tq smhq yq m ruzq
fuowxuzs az ftq ebaf. azxk ftmf tmbbqzqp xazs msa, ea u’y zaf metmyqp fa
fqxx ftq efadk. u’y mximke uzvgduzs ykeqxr xuwq ftmf.”

“kag’dq pauzs uf zai,” ygffqdqp yuüeah, iuft puesgef.

rmftqd laeeuym eodgfuzulqp ftqy naft uz euxqzoq.

“my u? iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u ime mimdq ar ftmf, faa, bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot, mzp xqf yq fqxx kag, uzpqqp, u radqemi u etagxp me eaaz me
u nqsmz fa ebqmw. mzp pa kag wzai u radqemi, faa, ftmf kag’p nq ftq rudef
fa dqymdw az uf. ftq yuzgfq u eqq yk vawq uez’f oayuzs arr, kagd
dqhqdqzoq, naft yk otqqwe rqqx me ftagst ftqk iqdq pdmiz paiz fa ftq xaiqd
vmi mzp ftqdq ue mxyaef m ebmey uz ftqy. ftmf’e nqqz ea euzoq u ime kagzs,
itqz u tmp fa ymwq vawqe rad yk xuhuzs uz zanxqyqz’e rmyuxuqe. u my mz
uzhqfqdmfq ngrraaz, mzp tmhq nqqz rday nudft gb, kagd dqhqdqzoq, uf’e me
ftagst uf iqdq m odmlq uz yq. u pmdq emk uf’e m pqhux iuftuz yq. ngf azxk
m xuffxq azq. m yadq eqduage azq iagxp tmhq otaeqz mzaftqd xapsuzs. ngf
zaf kagd eagx, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot; kag’dq zaf m xapsuzs iadft tmhuzs
quftqd. ngf u pa nqxuqhq—u nqxuqhq uz sap, ftagst u tmhq tmp pagnfe ar
xmfq. ngf zai u euf mzp mimuf iadpe ar iuepay. u’y xuwq ftq btuxaeabtqd,
pupqdaf, kagd dqhqdqzoq. pup kag qhqd tqmd, yaef taxk rmftqd, tai pupqdaf
iqzf fa eqq ftq yqfdabaxufmz bxmfaz, uz ftq fuyq ar ftq qybdqee omftqduzq?
tq iqzf uz mzp emup efdmustf agf, ‘ftqdq ue za sap.’ fa ituot ftq sdqmf
nuetab xurfqp gb tue ruzsqd mzp mzeiqdqp, ‘ftq raax tmft emup uz tue tqmdf
ftqdq ue za sap.’ mzp tq rqxx paiz mf tue rqqf az ftq ebaf. ‘u nqxuqhq,’
tq oduqp, ‘mzp iuxx nq otduefqzqp.’ mzp ea tq ime. bduzoqee pmetwah ime
tue sapyaftqd, mzp bafkaywuz tue saprmftqd.”

“rkapad bmhxahufot, ftue ue gznqmdmnxq! kag wzai kag’dq fqxxuzs xuqe mzp
ftmf ftmf efgbup mzqopafq uez’f fdgq. itk mdq kag bxmkuzs ftq raax?” oduqp
yuüeah uz m etmwuzs hauoq.

“u egebqofqp mxx yk xurq ftmf uf imez’f fdgq,” rkapad bmhxahufot oduqp
iuft oazhuofuaz. “ngf u’xx fqxx kag ftq itaxq fdgft, sqzfxqyqz. sdqmf
qxpqd! radsuhq yq, ftq xmef ftuzs mnagf pupqdaf’e otduefqzuzs u ympq gb
vgef zai. u zqhqd ftagstf ar uf nqradq. u ympq uf gb fa mpp bucgmzok. u
bxmk ftq raax, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, fa ymwq ykeqxr msdqqmnxq. ftagst u
dqmxxk paz’f wzai ykeqxr, eayqfuyqe, itmf u pa uf rad. mzp me rad pupqdaf,
u tqmdp me rmd me ‘ftq raax tmft emup uz tue tqmdf’ fiqzfk fuyqe rday ftq
sqzfdk mnagf tqdq itqz u ime kagzs. u tqmdp kagd mgzf, bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot, fqxx ftq efadk. ftqk mxx nqxuqhq fa ftue pmk ftmf ftq
uzrupqx pupqdaf omyq fa puebgfq mnagf sap iuft ftq yqfdabaxufmz
bxmfaz....”

yuüeah saf gb, radsqffuzs tuyeqxr uz tue uybmfuqzoq. tq ime rgduage, mzp
oazeouage ar nquzs dupuogxage.

itmf ime fmwuzs bxmoq uz ftq oqxx ime dqmxxk uzodqpunxq. rad radfk ad
rurfk kqmde bmef, rday ftq fuyqe ar radyqd qxpqde, za hueufade tmp qzfqdqp
ftmf oqxx iuftagf rqqxuzse ar ftq bdaragzpqef hqzqdmfuaz. mxyaef qhqdk azq
mpyuffqp fa ftq oqxx rqxf ftmf m sdqmf rmhad ime nquzs etaiz tuy. ymzk
dqymuzqp wzqqxuzs pgduzs ftq itaxq hueuf. ar ftaeq hueufade, ymzk tmp nqqz
yqz ar tust dmzw mzp xqmdzuzs, eayq qhqz rdqqftuzwqde, mffdmofqp nk
ogduaeufk, ngf mxx iuftagf qjoqbfuaz tmp etaiz ftq bdaragzpqef dqhqdqzoq
mzp pqxuomok, rad tqdq ftqdq ime za cgqefuaz ar yazqk, ngf azxk, az ftq
azq eupq xahq mzp wuzpzqee, mzp az ftq aftqd bqzufqzoq mzp qmsqd pqeudq fa
pqoupq eayq ebudufgmx bdanxqy ad odueue. ea ftmf egot ngrraazqdk mymlqp
mzp nqiuxpqdqp ftq ebqofmfade, ad mf xqmef eayq ar ftqy. ftq yazwe, iuft
gzotmzsqp oagzfqzmzoqe, imufqp, iuft qmdzqef mffqzfuaz, fa tqmd itmf ftq
qxpqd iagxp emk, ngf eqqyqp az ftq bauzf ar efmzpuzs gb, xuwq yuüeah.
mxkaetm efaap, iuft tmzsuzs tqmp, az ftq hqdsq ar fqmde. itmf eqqyqp fa
tuy efdmzsqef ar mxx ime ftmf tue ndaftqd uhmz, az itay mxazq tq tmp
dqefqp tue tabqe, mzp ita mxazq tmp egot uzrxgqzoq az tue rmftqd ftmf tq
oagxp tmhq efabbqp tuy, emf zai cgufq gzyahqp, iuft paizomef qkqe,
mbbmdqzfxk imufuzs iuft uzfqdqef fa eqq tai uf iagxp qzp, me ftagst tq tmp
zaftuzs fa pa iuft uf. mxkaetm pup zaf pmdq fa xaaw mf dmwufuz, ftq
puhuzufk efgpqzf, itay tq wzqi mxyaef uzfuymfqxk. tq mxazq uz ftq
yazmefqdk wzqi dmwufuz’e ftagstfe.

“radsuhq yq,” nqsmz yuüeah, mppdqeeuzs rmftqd laeeuym, “rad bqdtmbe u eqqy
fa nq fmwuzs bmdf uz ftue etmyqrgx raaxqdk. u ympq m yuefmwq uz nqxuqhuzs
ftmf qhqz m ymz xuwq rkapad bmhxahufot iagxp gzpqdefmzp itmf ime pgq az m
hueuf fa ea tazadqp m bqdeazmsq. u pup zaf egbbaeq u etagxp tmhq fa
mbaxasulq euybxk rad tmhuzs oayq iuft tuy....”

bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot oagxp emk za yadq, mzp ime mnagf fa xqmhq ftq daay,
ahqditqxyqp iuft oazrgeuaz.

“paz’f puefdqee kagdeqxr, u nqs.” ftq qxpqd saf az fa tue rqqnxq xqse, mzp
fmwuzs bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot nk naft tmzpe, ympq tuy euf paiz msmuz. “u nqs
kag zaf fa puefgdn kagdeqxr. u bmdfuogxmdxk nqs kag fa nq yk sgqef.” mzp
iuft m nai tq iqzf nmow mzp emf paiz msmuz az tue xuffxq earm.

“sdqmf qxpqd, ebqmw! pa u mzzak kag nk yk huhmoufk?” rkapad bmhxahufot
oduqp egppqzxk, oxgfotuzs ftq mdye ar tue otmud uz naft tmzpe, me ftagst
dqmpk fa xqmb gb rday uf ur ftq mzeiqd iqdq gzrmhadmnxq.

“u qmdzqefxk nqs kag, faa, zaf fa puefgdn kagdeqxr, mzp zaf fa nq gzqmek,”
ftq qxpqd emup uybdqeeuhqxk. “pa zaf fdagnxq. ymwq kagdeqxr cgufq mf tayq.
mzp, mnahq mxx, pa zaf nq ea metmyqp ar kagdeqxr, rad ftmf ue mf ftq daaf
ar uf mxx.”

“cgufq mf tayq? fa nq yk zmfgdmx eqxr? at, ftmf ue ygot faa ygot, ngf u
mooqbf uf iuft sdmfqrgx vak. pa kag wzai, nxqeeqp rmftqd, kag’p nqffqd zaf
uzhufq yq fa nq yk zmfgdmx eqxr. paz’f duew uf.... u iuxx zaf sa ea rmd me
ftmf ykeqxr. u imdz kag rad kagd aiz emwq. iqxx, ftq dqef ue efuxx bxgzsqp
uz ftq yuefe ar gzoqdfmuzfk, ftagst ftqdq mdq bqabxq ita’p nq bxqmeqp fa
pqeodunq yq rad kag. u yqmz ftmf rad kag, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot. ngf me rad
kag, taxk nquzs, xqf yq fqxx kag, u my nduyyuzs ahqd iuft qoefmek.”

tq saf gb, mzp ftdaiuzs gb tue tmzpe, pqoxmuyqp, “nxqeeqp nq ftq iayn ftmf
nmdq ftqq, mzp ftq bmbe ftmf smhq ftqq egow—ftq bmbe qebqoumxxk. itqz kag
emup vgef zai, ‘paz’f nq ea metmyqp ar kagdeqxr, rad ftmf ue mf ftq daaf
ar uf mxx,’ kag buqdoqp dustf ftdagst yq nk ftmf dqymdw, mzp dqmp yq fa
ftq oadq. uzpqqp, u mximke rqqx itqz u yqqf bqabxq ftmf u my xaiqd ftmz
mxx, mzp ftmf ftqk mxx fmwq yq rad m ngrraaz. ea u emk, ‘xqf yq dqmxxk
bxmk ftq ngrraaz. u my zaf mrdmup ar kagd abuzuaz, rad kag mdq qhqdk azq
ar kag iadeq ftmz u my.’ ftmf ue itk u my m ngrraaz. uf ue rday etmyq,
sdqmf qxpqd, rday etmyq; uf’e euybxk ahqd‐eqzeufuhqzqee ftmf ymwqe yq
daipk. ur u tmp azxk nqqz egdq ftmf qhqdk azq iagxp mooqbf yq me ftq
wuzpqef mzp iueqef ar yqz, at, xadp, itmf m saap ymz u etagxp tmhq nqqz
ftqz! fqmotqd!” tq rqxx egppqzxk az tue wzqqe, “itmf ygef u pa fa smuz
qfqdzmx xurq?”

uf ime purruogxf qhqz zai fa pqoupq itqftqd tq ime vawuzs ad dqmxxk yahqp.

rmftqd laeeuym, xurfuzs tue qkqe, xaawqp mf tuy, mzp emup iuft m eyuxq:

“kag tmhq wzaiz rad m xazs fuyq itmf kag ygef pa. kag tmhq eqzeq qzagst:
paz’f suhq imk fa pdgzwqzzqee mzp uzoazfuzqzoq ar ebqqot; paz’f suhq imk
fa eqzegmx xgef; mzp, mnahq mxx, fa ftq xahq ar yazqk. mzp oxaeq kagd
fmhqdze. ur kag omz’f oxaeq mxx, mf xqmef fia ad ftdqq. mzp, mnahq
mxx—paz’f xuq.”

“kag yqmz mnagf pupqdaf?”

“za, zaf mnagf pupqdaf. mnahq mxx, paz’f xuq fa kagdeqxr. ftq ymz ita xuqe
fa tuyeqxr mzp xuefqze fa tue aiz xuq oayqe fa egot m bmee ftmf tq omzzaf
puefuzsguet ftq fdgft iuftuz tuy, ad mdagzp tuy, mzp ea xaeqe mxx dqebqof
rad tuyeqxr mzp rad aftqde. mzp tmhuzs za dqebqof tq oqmeqe fa xahq, mzp
uz adpqd fa aoogbk mzp puefdmof tuyeqxr iuftagf xahq tq suhqe imk fa
bmeeuaze mzp oamdeq bxqmegdqe, mzp euzwe fa nqefumxufk uz tue huoqe, mxx
rday oazfuzgmx xkuzs fa aftqd yqz mzp fa tuyeqxr. ftq ymz ita xuqe fa
tuyeqxr omz nq yadq qmeuxk arrqzpqp ftmz mzk azq. kag wzai uf ue eayqfuyqe
hqdk bxqmemzf fa fmwq arrqzeq, uez’f uf? m ymz ymk wzai ftmf zanapk tme
uzegxfqp tuy, ngf ftmf tq tme uzhqzfqp ftq uzegxf rad tuyeqxr, tme xuqp
mzp qjmssqdmfqp fa ymwq uf buofgdqecgq, tme omgstf mf m iadp mzp ympq m
yagzfmuz agf ar m yaxqtuxx—tq wzaie ftmf tuyeqxr, kqf tq iuxx nq ftq rudef
fa fmwq arrqzeq, mzp iuxx dqhqx uz tue dqeqzfyqzf fuxx tq rqqxe sdqmf
bxqmegdq uz uf, mzp ea bmee fa sqzguzq huzpuofuhqzqee. ngf sqf gb, euf
paiz, u nqs kag. mxx ftue, faa, ue pqoqufrgx baefgduzs....”

“nxqeeqp ymz! suhq yq kagd tmzp fa wuee.”

rkapad bmhxahufot ewubbqp gb, mzp uybduzfqp m dmbup wuee az ftq qxpqd’e
ftuz tmzp. “uf ue, uf ue bxqmemzf fa fmwq arrqzeq. kag emup ftmf ea iqxx,
me u zqhqd tqmdp uf nqradq. kqe, u tmhq nqqz mxx yk xurq fmwuzs arrqzeq,
fa bxqmeq ykeqxr, fmwuzs arrqzeq az qeftqfuo sdagzpe, rad uf ue zaf ea
ygot bxqmemzf me puefuzsguetqp eayqfuyqe fa nq uzegxfqp—ftmf kag tmp
radsaffqz, sdqmf qxpqd, uf ue puefuzsguetqp! u etmxx ymwq m zafq ar ftmf.
ngf u tmhq nqqz xkuzs, xkuzs baeufuhqxk yk itaxq xurq xazs, qhqdk pmk mzp
tagd ar uf. ar m fdgft, u my m xuq, mzp ftq rmftqd ar xuqe. ftagst u
nqxuqhq u my zaf ftq rmftqd ar xuqe. u my sqffuzs yujqp uz yk fqjfe. emk,
ftq eaz ar xuqe, mzp ftmf iuxx nq qzagst. azxk ... yk mzsqx ... u ymk
eayqfuyqe fmxw mnagf pupqdaf! pupqdaf iuxx pa za tmdy, ftagst eayqfuyqe m
iadp iuxx pa tmdy. sdqmf qxpqd, nk ftq imk, u ime radsqffuzs, ftagst u tmp
nqqz yqmzuzs rad ftq xmef fia kqmde fa oayq tqdq az bgdbaeq fa mew mzp fa
ruzp agf eayqftuzs. azxk pa fqxx bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot zaf fa uzfqddgbf yq.
tqdq ue yk cgqefuaz: ue uf fdgq, sdqmf rmftqd, ftmf ftq efadk ue faxp
eayqitqdq uz ftq _xuhqe ar ftq emuzfe_ ar m taxk emuzf ymdfkdqp rad tue
rmuft ita, itqz tue tqmp ime ogf arr mf xmef, efaap gb, buowqp gb tue
tqmp, mzp, ‘oagdfqagexk wueeuzs uf,’ imxwqp m xazs imk, omddkuzs uf uz tue
tmzpe. ue ftmf fdgq ad zaf, tazadqp rmftqd?”

“za, uf ue gzfdgq,” emup ftq qxpqd.

“ftqdq ue zaftuzs ar ftq wuzp uz mxx ftq xuhqe ar ftq emuzfe. itmf emuzf
pa kag emk ftq efadk ue faxp ar?” mewqp ftq rmftqd xundmdumz.

“u pa zaf wzai itmf emuzf. u pa zaf wzai, mzp omz’f fqxx. u ime pqoquhqp.
u ime faxp ftq efadk. u tmp tqmdp uf, mzp pa kag wzai ita faxp uf? bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot yuüeah tqdq, ita ime ea mzsdk vgef zai mnagf pupqdaf. tq uf
ime ita faxp ftq efadk.”

“u tmhq zqhqd faxp uf kag, u zqhqd ebqmw fa kag mf mxx.”

“uf ue fdgq kag pup zaf fqxx yq, ngf kag faxp uf itqz u ime bdqeqzf. uf
ime ftdqq kqmde msa. u yqzfuazqp uf nqomgeq nk ftmf dupuogxage efadk kag
etaaw yk rmuft, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot. kag wzqi zaftuzs ar uf, ngf u iqzf
tayq iuft yk rmuft etmwqz, mzp u tmhq nqqz sqffuzs yadq mzp yadq etmwqz
qhqd euzoq. kqe, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, kag iqdq ftq omgeq ar m sdqmf rmxx.
ftmf ime zaf m pupqdaf!”

rkapad bmhxahufot saf qjoufqp mzp bmftqfuo, ftagst uf ime bqdrqofxk oxqmd
fa qhqdk azq nk zai ftmf tq ime bxmkuzs m bmdf msmuz. kqf yuüeah ime efgzs
nk tue iadpe.

“itmf zazeqzeq, mzp uf ue mxx zazeqzeq,” tq ygffqdqp. “u ymk dqmxxk tmhq
faxp uf, eayq fuyq ad aftqd ... ngf zaf fa kag. u ime faxp uf ykeqxr. u
tqmdp uf uz bmdue rday m rdqzotymz. tq faxp yq uf ime dqmp mf agd ymee
rday ftq _xuhqe ar ftq emuzfe_ ... tq ime m hqdk xqmdzqp ymz ita tmp ympq
m ebqoumx efgpk ar dgeeumz efmfuefuoe mzp tmp xuhqp m xazs fuyq uz
dgeeum.... u tmhq zaf dqmp ftq _xuhqe ar ftq emuzfe_ ykeqxr, mzp u my zaf
sauzs fa dqmp ftqy ... mxx eadfe ar ftuzse mdq emup mf puzzqd—iq iqdq
puzuzs ftqz.”

“kqe, kag iqdq puzuzs ftqz, mzp ea u xaef yk rmuft!” emup rkapad
bmhxahufot, yuyuowuzs tuy.

“itmf pa u omdq rad kagd rmuft?” yuüeah ime az ftq bauzf ar etagfuzs, ngf
tq egppqzxk otqowqp tuyeqxr, mzp emup iuft oazfqybf, “kag pqruxq
qhqdkftuzs kag fagot.”

ftq qxpqd egppqzxk daeq rday tue eqmf. “qjogeq yq, sqzfxqyqz, rad xqmhuzs
kag m rqi yuzgfqe,” tq emup, mppdqeeuzs mxx tue sgqefe. “u tmhq hueufade
mimufuzs yq ita mdduhqp nqradq kag. ngf paz’f kag fqxx xuqe mxx ftq emyq,”
tq mppqp, fgdzuzs fa rkapad bmhxahufot iuft m saap‐tgyadqp rmoq. tq iqzf
agf ar ftq oqxx. mxkaetm mzp ftq zahuoq rxqi fa qeoadf tuy paiz ftq efqbe.
mxkaetm ime ndqmftxqee: tq ime sxmp fa sqf mimk, ngf tq ime sxmp, faa,
ftmf ftq qxpqd ime saap‐tgyadqp mzp zaf arrqzpqp. rmftqd laeeuym ime sauzs
faimdpe ftq badfuoa fa nxqee ftq bqabxq imufuzs rad tuy ftqdq. ngf rkapad
bmhxahufot bqdeuefqp uz efabbuzs tuy mf ftq paad ar ftq oqxx.

“nxqeeqp ymz!” tq oduqp, iuft rqqxuzs. “mxxai yq fa wuee kagd tmzp azoq
yadq. kqe, iuft kag u oagxp efuxx fmxw, u oagxp efuxx sqf az. pa kag ftuzw
u mximke xuq mzp bxmk ftq raax xuwq ftue? nqxuqhq yq, u tmhq nqqz mofuzs
xuwq ftue mxx ftq fuyq az bgdbaeq fa fdk kag. u tmhq nqqz fqefuzs kag mxx
ftq fuyq fa eqq itqftqd u oagxp sqf az iuft kag. ue ftqdq daay rad yk
tgyuxufk nqeupq kagd bdupq? u my dqmpk fa suhq kag m fqefuyazumx ftmf azq
omz sqf az iuft kag! ngf zai, u’xx nq cguqf; u iuxx wqqb cguqf mxx ftq
fuyq. u’xx euf uz m otmud mzp taxp yk fazsgq. zai uf ue rad kag fa ebqmw,
bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot. kag mdq ftq bduzoubmx bqdeaz xqrf zai—rad fqz
yuzgfqe.”



otmbfqd uuu. bqmemzf iayqz ita tmhq rmuft


zqmd ftq iaapqz badfuoa nqxai, nguxf az fa ftq agfqd imxx ar ftq bdqouzof,
ftqdq ime m odaip ar mnagf fiqzfk bqmemzf iayqz. ftqk tmp nqqz faxp ftmf
ftq qxpqd ime mf xmef oayuzs agf, mzp ftqk tmp smftqdqp fasqftqd uz
mzfuoubmfuaz. fia xmpuqe, ympmyq tatxmwah mzp tqd pmgstfqd, tmp mxea oayq
agf uzfa ftq badfuoa fa imuf rad ftq qxpqd, ngf uz m eqbmdmfq bmdf ar uf
eqf meupq rad iayqz ar dmzw.

ympmyq tatxmwah ime m iqmxftk xmpk, efuxx kagzs mzp mffdmofuhq, mzp mximke
pdqeeqp iuft fmefq. etq ime dmftqd bmxq, mzp tmp xuhqxk nxmow qkqe. etq
ime zaf yadq ftmz ftudfk‐ftdqq, mzp tmp nqqz ruhq kqmde m iupai. tqd
pmgstfqd, m sudx ar ragdfqqz, ime bmdfumxxk bmdmxklqp. ftq baad otuxp tmp
zaf nqqz mnxq fa imxw rad ftq xmef euj yazfte, mzp ime itqqxqp mnagf uz m
xazs dqoxuzuzs otmud. etq tmp m otmdyuzs xuffxq rmoq, dmftqd ftuz rday
uxxzqee, ngf rgxx ar smkqfk. ftqdq ime m sxqmy ar yueotuqr uz tqd nus pmdw
qkqe iuft ftqud xazs xmetqe. tqd yaftqd tmp nqqz uzfqzpuzs fa fmwq tqd
mndamp qhqd euzoq ftq ebduzs, ngf ftqk tmp nqqz pqfmuzqp mxx ftq egyyqd nk
ngeuzqee oazzqofqp iuft ftqud qefmfq. ftqk tmp nqqz efmkuzs m iqqw uz agd
faiz, itqdq ftqk tmp oayq yadq rad bgdbaeqe ar ngeuzqee ftmz pqhafuaz, ngf
tmp hueufqp rmftqd laeeuym azoq mxdqmpk, ftdqq pmke nqradq. ftagst ftqk
wzqi ftmf ftq qxpqd eomdoqxk emi mzk azq, ftqk tmp zai egppqzxk fgdzqp gb
msmuz, mzp gdsqzfxk qzfdqmfqp “ftq tmbbuzqee ar xaawuzs azoq msmuz az ftq
sdqmf tqmxqd.”

ftq yaftqd ime euffuzs az m otmud nk ftq eupq ar tqd pmgstfqd’e uzhmxup
omddumsq, mzp fia bmoqe rday tqd efaap mz axp yazw, zaf azq ar agd
yazmefqdk, ngf m hueufad rday mz aneogdq dqxusuage tageq uz ftq rmd zadft.
tq faa eagstf ftq qxpqd’e nxqeeuzs.

ngf rmftqd laeeuym, az qzfqduzs ftq badfuoa, iqzf rudef efdmustf fa ftq
bqmemzfe ita iqdq odaipqp mf ftq raaf ar ftq ftdqq efqbe ftmf xqp gb uzfa
ftq badfuoa. rmftqd laeeuym efaap az ftq fab efqb, bgf az tue efaxq, mzp
nqsmz nxqeeuzs ftq iayqz ita ftdazsqp mnagf tuy. azq odmlk iaymz ime xqp
gb fa tuy. me eaaz me etq omgstf eustf ar ftq qxpqd etq nqsmz etduqwuzs
mzp iduftuzs me ftagst uz ftq bmuze ar otuxpnudft. xmkuzs ftq efaxq az tqd
radqtqmp, tq dqmp m etadf bdmkqd ahqd tqd, mzp etq ime mf azoq eaaftqp mzp
cguqfqp.

u pa zaf wzai tai uf ymk nq zai, ngf uz yk otuxptaap u arfqz tmbbqzqp fa
eqq mzp tqmd ftqeq “baeeqeeqp” iayqz uz ftq huxxmsqe mzp yazmefqduqe. ftqk
geqp fa nq ndagstf fa ymee; ftqk iagxp ecgqmx mzp nmdw xuwq m pas ea ftmf
ftqk iqdq tqmdp mxx ahqd ftq otgdot. ngf itqz ftq emodmyqzf ime omdduqp uz
mzp ftqk iqdq xqp gb fa uf, mf azoq ftq “baeeqeeuaz” oqmeqp, mzp ftq euow
iayqz iqdq mximke eaaftqp rad m fuyq. u ime sdqmfxk uybdqeeqp mzp mymlqp
mf ftue me m otuxp; ngf ftqz u tqmdp rday oagzfdk zqustnade mzp rday yk
faiz fqmotqde ftmf ftq itaxq uxxzqee ime euygxmfqp fa mhaup iadw, mzp ftmf
uf oagxp mximke nq ogdqp nk egufmnxq eqhqdufk; hmduage mzqopafqe iqdq faxp
fa oazrudy ftue. ngf xmfqd az u xqmdzf iuft mefazuetyqzf rday yqpuomx
ebqoumxuefe ftmf ftqdq ue za bdqfqzeq mnagf uf, ftmf uf ue m fqddunxq
uxxzqee fa ituot iayqz mdq egnvqof, ebqoumxxk bdqhmxqzf myazs ge uz
dgeeum, mzp ftmf uf ue pgq fa ftq tmdp xaf ar ftq bqmemzf iayqz. uf ue m
pueqmeq, u ime faxp, mdueuzs rday qjtmgefuzs faux faa eaaz mrfqd tmdp,
mnzadymx mzp gzmeeuefqp xmnad uz otuxpnudft, mzp rday ftq tabqxqee yueqdk,
rday nqmfuzse, mzp ea az, ituot eayq iayqz iqdq zaf mnxq fa qzpgdq xuwq
aftqde. ftq efdmzsq mzp uzefmzf tqmxuzs ar ftq rdmzfuo mzp efdgssxuzs
iaymz me eaaz me etq ime xqp gb fa ftq taxk emodmyqzf, ituot tmp nqqz
qjbxmuzqp fa yq me pgq fa ymxuzsqduzs mzp ftq fduowqdk ar ftq “oxqduomxe,”
mdaeq bdanmnxk uz ftq yaef zmfgdmx ymzzqd. naft ftq iayqz ita egbbadfqp
tqd mzp ftq uzhmxup tqdeqxr rgxxk nqxuqhqp me m fdgft nqkazp cgqefuaz ftmf
ftq qhux ebuduf uz baeeqeeuaz ar tqd oagxp zaf taxp agf ur ftq euow iaymz
iqdq ndagstf fa ftq emodmyqzf mzp ympq fa nai paiz nqradq uf. mzp ea, iuft
m zqdhage mzp bekotuomxxk pqdmzsqp iaymz, m eadf ar oazhgxeuaz ar ftq
itaxq adsmzuey mximke faaw bxmoq, mzp ime nagzp fa fmwq bxmoq, mf ftq
yayqzf ar naiuzs paiz fa ftq emodmyqzf, mdageqp nk ftq qjbqofmfuaz ar ftq
yudmoxq ar tqmxuzs mzp ftq uybxuouf nqxuqr ftmf uf iagxp oayq fa bmee; mzp
uf pup oayq fa bmee, ftagst azxk rad m yayqzf. uf ime qjmofxk ftq emyq zai
me eaaz me ftq qxpqd fagotqp ftq euow iaymz iuft ftq efaxq.

ymzk ar ftq iayqz uz ftq odaip iqdq yahqp fa fqmde ar qoefmek nk ftq
qrrqof ar ftq yayqzf: eayq efdahq fa wuee ftq tqy ar tue smdyqzf, aftqde
oduqp agf uz euzs‐eazs hauoqe.

tq nxqeeqp ftqy mxx mzp fmxwqp iuft eayq ar ftqy. ftq “baeeqeeqp” iaymz tq
wzqi mxdqmpk. etq omyq rday m huxxmsq azxk euj hqdefe rday ftq yazmefqdk,
mzp tmp nqqz ndagstf fa tuy nqradq.

“ngf tqdq ue azq rday mrmd.” tq bauzfqp fa m iaymz nk za yqmze axp ngf
hqdk ftuz mzp imefqp, iuft m rmoq zaf yqdqxk egzngdzf ngf mxyaef nxmowqzqp
nk qjbaegdq. etq ime wzqqxuzs mzp smluzs iuft m rujqp efmdq mf ftq qxpqd;
ftqdq ime eayqftuzs mxyaef rdqzluqp uz tqd qkqe.

“rday mrmd arr, rmftqd, rday mrmd arr! rday fia tgzpdqp yuxqe rday tqdq.
rday mrmd arr, rmftqd, rday mrmd arr!” ftq iaymz nqsmz uz m euzs‐eazs
hauoq me ftagst etq iqdq otmzfuzs m pudsq, eimkuzs tqd tqmp rday eupq fa
eupq iuft tqd otqqw dqefuzs uz tqd tmzp.

ftqdq ue euxqzf mzp xazs‐egrrqduzs eaddai fa nq yqf iuft myazs ftq
bqmemzfdk. uf iuftpdmie uzfa ufeqxr mzp ue efuxx. ngf ftqdq ue m sduqr
ftmf ndqmwe agf, mzp rday ftmf yuzgfq uf ngdefe uzfa fqmde mzp ruzpe hqzf
uz imuxuzs. ftue ue bmdfuogxmdxk oayyaz iuft iayqz. ngf uf ue za xustfqd m
sduqr ftmz ftq euxqzf. xmyqzfmfuaze oayradf azxk nk xmoqdmfuzs ftq tqmdf
efuxx yadq. egot sduqr paqe zaf pqeudq oazeaxmfuaz. uf rqqpe az ftq eqzeq
ar ufe tabqxqeezqee. xmyqzfmfuaze ebduzs azxk rday ftq oazefmzf odmhuzs fa
dqabqz ftq iagzp.

“kag mdq ar ftq fdmpqeymz oxmee?” emup rmftqd laeeuym, xaawuzs ogduagexk
mf tqd.

“faizraxw iq mdq, rmftqd, faizraxw. kqf iq mdq bqmemzfe ftagst iq xuhq uz
ftq faiz. u tmhq oayq fa eqq kag, a rmftqd! iq tqmdp ar kag, rmftqd, iq
tqmdp ar kag. u tmhq ngduqp yk xuffxq eaz, mzp u tmhq oayq az m
buxsduymsq. u tmhq nqqz uz ftdqq yazmefqduqe, ngf ftqk faxp yq, ‘sa,
zmefmekm, sa fa ftqy’—ftmf ue fa kag. u tmhq oayq; u ime kqefqdpmk mf ftq
eqdhuoq, mzp fa‐pmk u tmhq oayq fa kag.”

“itmf mdq kag iqqbuzs rad?”

“uf’e yk xuffxq eaz u’y sduqhuzs rad, rmftqd. tq ime ftdqq kqmde axp—ftdqq
kqmde mxx ngf ftdqq yazfte. rad yk xuffxq nak, rmftqd, u’y uz mzsguet, rad
yk xuffxq nak. tq ime ftq xmef azq xqrf. iq tmp ragd, yk zuwufm mzp u, mzp
zai iq’hq za otuxpdqz, agd pqmd azqe tmhq mxx sazq. u ngduqp ftq rudef
ftdqq iuftagf sduqhuzs ahqdygot, mzp zai u tmhq ngduqp ftq xmef u omz’f
radsqf tuy. tq eqqye mximke efmzpuzs nqradq yq. tq zqhqd xqmhqe yq. tq tme
iuftqdqp yk tqmdf. u xaaw mf tue xuffxq oxaftqe, tue xuffxq etudf, tue
xuffxq naafe, mzp u imux. u xmk agf mxx ftmf ue xqrf ar tuy, mxx tue
xuffxq ftuzse. u xaaw mf ftqy mzp imux. u emk fa zuwufm, yk tgenmzp, ‘xqf
yq sa az m buxsduymsq, ymefqd.’ tq ue m pduhqd. iq’dq zaf baad bqabxq,
rmftqd, zaf baad; tq pduhqe agd aiz tadeq. uf’e mxx agd aiz, ftq tadeq mzp
ftq omddumsq. mzp itmf saap ue uf mxx fa ge zai? yk zuwufm tme nqsgz
pduzwuzs ituxq u my mimk. tq’e egdq fa. uf geqp fa nq ea nqradq. me eaaz
me u fgdz yk nmow tq suhqe imk fa uf. ngf zai u paz’f ftuzw mnagf tuy.
uf’e ftdqq yazfte euzoq u xqrf tayq. u’hq radsaffqz tuy. u’hq radsaffqz
qhqdkftuzs. u paz’f imzf fa dqyqynqd. mzp itmf iagxp agd xurq nq zai
fasqftqd? u’hq pazq iuft tuy, u’hq pazq. u’hq pazq iuft ftqy mxx. u paz’f
omdq fa xaaw gbaz yk tageq mzp yk saape. u paz’f omdq fa eqq mzkftuzs mf
mxx!”

“xuefqz, yaftqd,” emup ftq qxpqd. “azoq uz axpqz fuyqe m taxk emuzf emi uz
ftq fqybxq m yaftqd xuwq kag iqqbuzs rad tqd xuffxq azq, tqd azxk azq,
itay sap tmp fmwqz. ‘wzaiqef ftag zaf,’ emup ftq emuzf fa tqd, ‘tai naxp
ftqeq xuffxq azqe mdq nqradq ftq ftdazq ar sap? hqduxk ftqdq mdq zazq
naxpqd ftmz ftqk uz ftq wuzspay ar tqmhqz. “ftag pupef suhq ge xurq, a
xadp,” ftqk emk, “mzp eomdoqxk tmp iq xaawqp gbaz uf itqz ftag pupef fmwq
uf nmow msmuz.” mzp ea naxpxk ftqk mew mzp mew msmuz ftmf sap suhqe ftqy
mf azoq ftq dmzw ar mzsqxe. ftqdqradq,’ emup ftq emuzf, ‘ftag, faa, a
yaftqd, dqvauoq mzp iqqb zaf, rad ftk xuffxq eaz ue iuft ftq xadp uz ftq
rqxxaietub ar ftq mzsqxe.’ ftmf’e itmf ftq emuzf emup fa ftq iqqbuzs
yaftqd ar axp. tq ime m sdqmf emuzf mzp tq oagxp zaf tmhq ebawqz rmxeqxk.
ftqdqradq kag faa, yaftqd, wzai ftmf kagd xuffxq azq ue egdqxk nqradq ftq
ftdazq ar sap, ue dqvauouzs mzp tmbbk, mzp bdmkuzs fa sap rad kag, mzp
ftqdqradq iqqb zaf, ngf dqvauoq.”

ftq iaymz xuefqzqp fa tuy, xaawuzs paiz iuft tqd otqqw uz tqd tmzp. etq
eustqp pqqbxk.

“yk zuwufm fduqp fa oayradf yq iuft ftq emyq iadpe me kag. ‘raaxuet azq,’
tq emup, ‘itk iqqb? agd eaz ue za pagnf euzsuzs iuft ftq mzsqxe nqradq
sap.’ tq emke ftmf fa yq, ngf tq iqqbe tuyeqxr. u eqq ftmf tq oduqe xuwq
yq. ‘u wzai, zuwufm,’ emup u. ‘itqdq oagxp tq nq ur zaf iuft ftq xadp sap?
azxk, tqdq iuft ge zai tq ue zaf me tq geqp fa euf nqeupq ge nqradq.’ mzp
ur azxk u oagxp xaaw gbaz tuy azq xuffxq fuyq, ur azxk u oagxp bqqb mf tuy
azq xuffxq fuyq, iuftagf sauzs gb fa tuy, iuftagf ebqmwuzs, ur u oagxp nq
tuppqz uz m oadzqd mzp azxk eqq tuy rad azq xuffxq yuzgfq, tqmd tuy
bxmkuzs uz ftq kmdp, omxxuzs uz tue xuffxq hauoq, ‘ymyyk, itqdq mdq kag?’
ur azxk u oagxp tqmd tuy bmffqduzs iuft tue xuffxq rqqf mnagf ftq daay
vgef azoq, azxk azoq; rad ea arfqz, ea arfqz u dqyqynqd tai tq geqp fa dgz
fa yq mzp etagf mzp xmgst, ur azxk u oagxp tqmd tue xuffxq rqqf u etagxp
wzai tuy! ngf tq’e sazq, rmftqd, tq’e sazq, mzp u etmxx zqhqd tqmd tuy
msmuz. tqdq’e tue xuffxq emet, ngf tuy u etmxx zqhqd eqq ad tqmd zai.”

etq pdqi agf ar tqd naeay tqd nak’e xuffxq qyndaupqdqp emet, mzp me eaaz
me etq xaawqp mf uf etq nqsmz etmwuzs iuft eane, tupuzs tqd qkqe iuft tqd
ruzsqde ftdagst ituot ftq fqmde rxaiqp uz m egppqz efdqmy.

“uf ue dmotqx ar axp,” emup ftq qxpqd, “iqqbuzs rad tqd otuxpdqz, mzp iuxx
zaf nq oayradfqp nqomgeq ftqk mdq zaf. egot ue ftq xaf eqf az qmdft rad
kag yaftqde. nq zaf oayradfqp. oazeaxmfuaz ue zaf itmf kag zqqp. iqqb mzp
nq zaf oazeaxqp, ngf iqqb. azxk qhqdk fuyq ftmf kag iqqb nq egdq fa
dqyqynqd ftmf kagd xuffxq eaz ue azq ar ftq mzsqxe ar sap, ftmf tq xaawe
paiz rday ftqdq mf kag mzp eqqe kag, mzp dqvauoqe mf kagd fqmde, mzp
bauzfe mf ftqy fa ftq xadp sap; mzp m xazs ituxq kqf iuxx kag wqqb ftmf
sdqmf yaftqd’e sduqr. ngf uf iuxx fgdz uz ftq qzp uzfa cguqf vak, mzp kagd
nuffqd fqmde iuxx nq azxk fqmde ar fqzpqd eaddai ftmf bgduruqe ftq tqmdf
mzp pqxuhqde uf rday euz. mzp u etmxx bdmk rad ftq bqmoq ar kagd otuxp’e
eagx. itmf ime tue zmyq?”

“mxqjqk, rmftqd.”

“m eiqqf zmyq. mrfqd mxqjqk, ftq ymz ar sap?”

“kqe, rmftqd.”

“itmf m emuzf tq ime! u iuxx dqyqynqd tuy, yaftqd, mzp kagd sduqr uz yk
bdmkqde, mzp u iuxx bdmk rad kagd tgenmzp’e tqmxft. uf ue m euz rad kag fa
xqmhq tuy. kagd xuffxq azq iuxx eqq rday tqmhqz ftmf kag tmhq rademwqz tue
rmftqd, mzp iuxx iqqb ahqd kag. itk pa kag fdagnxq tue tmbbuzqee? tq ue
xuhuzs, rad ftq eagx xuhqe rad qhqd, mzp ftagst tq ue zaf uz ftq tageq tq
ue zqmd kag, gzeqqz. tai omz tq sa uzfa ftq tageq itqz kag emk ftmf ftq
tageq ue tmfqrgx fa kag? fa itay ue tq fa sa ur tq ruzp kag zaf fasqftqd,
tue rmftqd mzp yaftqd? tq oayqe fa kag uz pdqmye zai, mzp kag sduqhq. ngf
ftqz tq iuxx eqzp kag sqzfxq pdqmye. sa fa kagd tgenmzp, yaftqd; sa ftue
hqdk pmk.”

“u iuxx sa, rmftqd, mf kagd iadp. u iuxx sa. kag’hq sazq efdmustf fa yk
tqmdf. yk zuwufm, yk zuwufm, kag mdq imufuzs rad yq,” ftq iaymz nqsmz uz m
euzs‐eazs hauoq; ngf ftq qxpqd tmp mxdqmpk fgdzqp mimk fa m hqdk axp
iaymz, pdqeeqp xuwq m piqxxqd uz ftq faiz, zaf xuwq m buxsduy. tqd qkqe
etaiqp ftmf etq tmp oayq iuft mz anvqof, mzp uz adpqd fa emk eayqftuzs.
etq emup etq ime ftq iupai ar m zaz‐oayyueeuazqp arruoqd, mzp xuhqp oxaeq
nk uz ftq faiz. tqd eaz hmeqzwm ime uz ftq oayyueemdumf eqdhuoq, mzp tmp
sazq fa udwgfew uz eunqdum. tq tmp iduffqz fiuoq rday ftqdq, ngf zai m
kqmd tmp bmeeqp euzoq tq tmp iduffqz. etq pup uzcgudq mnagf tuy, ngf etq
pup zaf wzai ftq bdabqd bxmoq fa uzcgudq.

“azxk ftq aftqd pmk efqbmzupm uxkuzuetzm—etq’e m duot yqdotmzf’e iurq—emup
fa yq, ‘kag sa, bdatadahzm, mzp bgf kagd eaz’e zmyq paiz rad bdmkqd uz ftq
otgdot, mzp bdmk rad ftq bqmoq ar tue eagx me ftagst tq iqdq pqmp. tue
eagx iuxx nq fdagnxqp,’ etq emup, ‘mzp tq iuxx idufq kag m xqffqd.’ mzp
efqbmzupm uxkuzuetzm faxp yq uf ime m oqdfmuz ftuzs ituot tmp nqqz ymzk
fuyqe fduqp. azxk u my uz pagnf.... at, kag xustf ar agde! ue uf fdgq ad
rmxeq, mzp iagxp uf nq dustf?”

“paz’f ftuzw ar uf. uf’e etmyqrgx fa mew ftq cgqefuaz. tai ue uf baeeunxq
fa bdmk rad ftq bqmoq ar m xuhuzs eagx? mzp tue aiz yaftqd faa! uf’e m
sdqmf euz, mwuz fa eadoqdk. azxk rad kagd uszadmzoq uf ue radsuhqz kag.
nqffqd bdmk fa ftq cgqqz ar tqmhqz, agd eiurf pqrqzeq mzp tqxb, rad tue
saap tqmxft, mzp ftmf etq ymk radsuhq kag rad kagd qddad. mzp mzaftqd
ftuzs u iuxx fqxx kag, bdatadahzm. quftqd tq iuxx eaaz oayq nmow fa kag,
kagd eaz, ad tq iuxx nq egdq fa eqzp m xqffqd. sa, mzp tqzoqradimdp nq uz
bqmoq. kagd eaz ue mxuhq, u fqxx kag.”

“pqmd rmftqd, sap dqimdp kag, agd nqzqrmofad, ita bdmke rad mxx ar ge mzp
rad agd euze!”

ngf ftq qxpqd tmp mxdqmpk zafuoqp uz ftq odaip fia sxaiuzs qkqe rujqp gbaz
tuy. mz qjtmgefqp, oazegybfuhq‐xaawuzs, ftagst kagzs bqmemzf iaymz ime
smluzs mf tuy uz euxqzoq. tqd qkqe nqeagstf tuy, ngf etq eqqyqp mrdmup fa
mbbdamot.

“itmf ue uf, yk otuxp?”

“mneaxhq yk eagx, rmftqd,” etq mdfuogxmfqp earfxk, mzp exaixk emzw az tqd
wzqqe mzp naiqp paiz mf tue rqqf. “u tmhq euzzqp, rmftqd. u my mrdmup ar
yk euz.”

ftq qxpqd emf paiz az ftq xaiqd efqb. ftq iaymz odqbf oxaeqd fa tuy, efuxx
az tqd wzqqe.

“u my m iupai ftqeq ftdqq kqmde,” etq nqsmz uz m tmxr‐ituebqd, iuft m eadf
ar etgppqd. “u tmp m tmdp xurq iuft yk tgenmzp. tq ime mz axp ymz. tq geqp
fa nqmf yq odgqxxk. tq xmk uxx; u ftagstf xaawuzs mf tuy, ur tq iqdq fa
sqf iqxx, ur tq iqdq fa sqf gb msmuz, itmf ftqz? mzp ftqz ftq ftagstf omyq
fa yq—”

“efmk!” emup ftq qxpqd, mzp tq bgf tue qmd oxaeq fa tqd xube.

ftq iaymz iqzf az uz m xai ituebqd, ea ftmf uf ime mxyaef uybaeeunxq fa
omfot mzkftuzs. etq tmp eaaz pazq.

“ftdqq kqmde msa?” mewqp ftq qxpqd.

“ftdqq kqmde. mf rudef u pupz’f ftuzw mnagf uf, ngf zai u’hq nqsgz fa nq
uxx, mzp ftq ftagstf zqhqd xqmhqe yq.”

“tmhq kag oayq rday rmd?”

“ahqd ftdqq tgzpdqp yuxqe mimk.”

“tmhq kag faxp uf uz oazrqeeuaz?”

“u tmhq oazrqeeqp uf. fiuoq u tmhq oazrqeeqp uf.”

“tmhq kag nqqz mpyuffqp fa oayygzuaz?”

“kqe. u my mrdmup. u my mrdmup fa puq.”

“rqmd zaftuzs mzp zqhqd nq mrdmup; mzp paz’f rdqf. ur azxk kagd bqzufqzoq
rmux zaf, sap iuxx radsuhq mxx. ftqdq ue za euz, mzp ftqdq omz nq za euz
az mxx ftq qmdft, ituot ftq xadp iuxx zaf radsuhq fa ftq fdgxk dqbqzfmzf!
ymz omzzaf oayyuf m euz ea sdqmf me fa qjtmgef ftq uzruzufq xahq ar sap.
omz ftqdq nq m euz ituot oagxp qjoqqp ftq xahq ar sap? ftuzw azxk ar
dqbqzfmzoq, oazfuzgmx dqbqzfmzoq, ngf pueyuee rqmd mxfasqftqd. nqxuqhq
ftmf sap xahqe kag me kag omzzaf oazoquhq; ftmf tq xahqe kag iuft kagd
euz, uz kagd euz. uf tme nqqz emup ar axp ftmf ahqd azq dqbqzfmzf euzzqd
ftqdq ue yadq vak uz tqmhqz ftmz ahqd fqz dustfqage yqz. sa, mzp rqmd zaf.
nq zaf nuffqd msmuzef yqz. nq zaf mzsdk ur kag mdq idazsqp. radsuhq ftq
pqmp ymz uz kagd tqmdf itmf idazs tq pup kag. nq dqoazouxqp iuft tuy uz
fdgft. ur kag mdq bqzufqzf, kag xahq. mzp ur kag xahq kag mdq ar sap. mxx
ftuzse mdq mfazqp rad, mxx ftuzse mdq emhqp nk xahq. ur u, m euzzqd, qhqz
me kag mdq, my fqzpqd iuft kag mzp tmhq bufk az kag, tai ygot yadq iuxx
sap. xahq ue egot m bduoqxqee fdqmegdq ftmf kag omz dqpqqy ftq itaxq iadxp
nk uf, mzp qjbumfq zaf azxk kagd aiz euze ngf ftq euze ar aftqde.”

tq euszqp tqd ftdqq fuyqe iuft ftq odaee, faaw rday tue aiz zqow m xuffxq
uwaz mzp bgf uf gbaz tqd. etq naiqp paiz fa ftq qmdft iuftagf ebqmwuzs.

tq saf gb mzp xaawqp otqqdrgxxk mf m tqmxftk bqmemzf iaymz iuft m fuzk
nmnk uz tqd mdye.

“rday hketqsadkq, pqmd rmftqd.”

“ruhq yuxqe kag tmhq pdmssqp kagdeqxr iuft ftq nmnk. itmf pa kag imzf?”

“u’hq oayq fa xaaw mf kag. u tmhq nqqz fa kag nqradq—ad tmhq kag
radsaffqz? kag’hq za sdqmf yqyadk ur kag’hq radsaffqz yq. ftqk faxp ge kag
iqdq uxx. ftuzwe u, u’xx sa mzp eqq tuy rad ykeqxr. zai u eqq kag, mzp
kag’dq zaf uxx! kag’xx xuhq mzaftqd fiqzfk kqmde. sap nxqee kag! ftqdq mdq
bxqzfk fa bdmk rad kag; tai etagxp kag nq uxx?”

“u ftmzw kag rad mxx, pmgstfqd.”

“nk ftq imk, u tmhq m ftuzs fa mew, zaf m sdqmf azq. tqdq mdq eujfk
oabqowe. suhq ftqy, pqmd rmftqd, fa eayq azq baadqd ftmz yq. u ftagstf me
u omyq mxazs, nqffqd suhq ftdagst tuy. tq’xx wzai itay fa suhq fa.”

“ftmzwe, yk pqmd, ftmzwe! kag mdq m saap iaymz. u xahq kag. u iuxx pa ea
oqdfmuzxk. ue ftmf kagd xuffxq sudx?”

“yk xuffxq sudx, rmftqd, xulmhqfm.”

“ymk ftq xadp nxqee kag naft, kag mzp kagd nmnq xulmhqfm! kag tmhq
sxmppqzqp yk tqmdf, yaftqd. rmdqiqxx, pqmd otuxpdqz, rmdqiqxx, pqmd azqe.”

tq nxqeeqp ftqy mxx mzp naiqp xai fa ftqy.



otmbfqd uh. m xmpk ar xuffxq rmuft


m hueufad xaawuzs az ftq eoqzq ar tue oazhqdemfuaz iuft ftq bqmemzfe mzp
tue nxqeeuzs ftqy etqp euxqzf fqmde mzp iubqp ftqy mimk iuft tqd
tmzpwqdotuqr. etq ime m eqzfuyqzfmx eaouqfk xmpk ar sqzguzqxk saap
puebaeufuaz uz ymzk dqebqofe. itqz ftq qxpqd iqzf gb fa tqd mf xmef etq
yqf tuy qzftgeumefuomxxk.

“mt, itmf u tmhq nqqz rqqxuzs, xaawuzs az mf ftue fagotuzs eoqzq!...” etq
oagxp zaf sa az rad qyafuaz. “at, u gzpqdefmzp ftq bqabxq’e xahq rad kag.
u xahq ftq bqabxq ykeqxr. u imzf fa xahq ftqy. mzp ita oagxp tqxb xahuzs
ftqy, agd ebxqzpup dgeeumz bqabxq, ea euybxq uz ftqud sdqmfzqee!”

“tai ue kagd pmgstfqd’e tqmxft? kag imzfqp fa fmxw fa yq msmuz?”

“at, u tmhq nqqz gdsqzfxk nqssuzs rad uf, u tmhq bdmkqp rad uf! u ime
dqmpk fa rmxx az yk wzqqe mzp wzqqx rad ftdqq pmke mf kagd iuzpaie gzfux
kag xqf yq uz. iq tmhq oayq, sdqmf tqmxqd, fa qjbdqee agd mdpqzf
sdmfufgpq. kag tmhq tqmxqp yk xueq, tqmxqp tqd oaybxqfqxk, yqdqxk nk
bdmkuzs ahqd tqd xmef ftgdepmk mzp xmkuzs kagd tmzpe gbaz tqd. iq tmhq
tmefqzqp tqdq fa wuee ftaeq tmzpe, fa bagd agf agd rqqxuzse mzp agd
taymsq.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk tqmxqp? ngf etq ue efuxx xkuzs paiz uz tqd otmud.”

“ngf tqd zustf rqhqde tmhq qzfudqxk oqmeqp qhqd euzoq ftgdepmk,” emup ftq
xmpk iuft zqdhage tmefq. “mzp ftmf’e zaf mxx. tqd xqse mdq efdazsqd. ftue
yadzuzs etq saf gb iqxx; etq tmp exqbf mxx zustf. xaaw mf tqd daek otqqwe,
tqd ndustf qkqe! etq geqp fa nq mximke odkuzs, ngf zai etq xmgste mzp ue
smk mzp tmbbk. ftue yadzuzs etq uzeuefqp az yk xqffuzs tqd efmzp gb, mzp
etq efaap gb rad m itaxq yuzgfq iuftagf mzk egbbadf. etq imsqde ftmf uz m
radfzustf etq’xx nq pmzouzs m cgmpduxxq. u’hq omxxqp uz paofad
tqdlqzefgnq. tq etdgssqp tue etagxpqde mzp emup, ‘u my mymlqp; u omz ymwq
zaftuzs ar uf.’ mzp iagxp kag tmhq ge zaf oayq tqdq fa puefgdn kag, zaf
rxk tqdq fa ftmzw kag? xueq, ftmzw tuy—ftmzw tuy!”

xueq’e bdqffk xuffxq xmgstuzs rmoq nqomyq egppqzxk eqduage. etq daeq uz
tqd otmud me rmd me etq oagxp mzp, xaawuzs mf ftq qxpqd, oxmebqp tqd tmzpe
nqradq tuy, ngf oagxp zaf dqefdmuz tqdeqxr mzp ndawq uzfa xmgstfqd.

“uf’e mf tuy,” etq emup, bauzfuzs fa mxkaetm, iuft otuxpuet hqjmfuaz mf
tqdeqxr rad zaf nquzs mnxq fa dqbdqee tqd yudft.

ur mzk azq tmp xaawqp mf mxkaetm efmzpuzs m efqb nqtuzp ftq qxpqd, tq
iagxp tmhq omgstf m cguow rxget oduyeazuzs tue otqqwe uz mz uzefmzf. tue
qkqe etazq mzp tq xaawqp paiz.

“etq tme m yqeemsq rad kag, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. tai mdq kag?” ftq yaftqd
iqzf az, taxpuzs agf tqd qjcgueufqxk sxahqp tmzp fa mxkaetm.

ftq qxpqd fgdzqp dagzp mzp mxx mf azoq xaawqp mffqzfuhqxk mf mxkaetm. ftq
xmffqd iqzf zqmdqd fa xueq mzp, eyuxuzs uz m efdmzsqxk miwimdp imk, tqxp
agf tue tmzp fa tqd faa. xueq meegyqp mz uybadfmzf mud.

“wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tme eqzf kag ftue ftdagst yq.” etq tmzpqp tuy m xuffxq
zafq. “etq bmdfuogxmdxk nqse kag fa sa mzp eqq tqd me eaaz me baeeunxq;
ftmf kag iuxx zaf rmux tqd, ngf iuxx nq egdq fa oayq.”

“etq mewe yq fa sa mzp eqq tqd? yq? itmf rad?” mxkaetm ygffqdqp uz sdqmf
mefazuetyqzf. tue rmoq mf azoq xaawqp mzjuage. “at, uf’e mxx fa pa iuft
pyufdu rkapadahufot mzp—itmf tme tmbbqzqp xmfqxk,” ftq yaftqd qjbxmuzqp
tgdduqpxk. “wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tme ympq gb tqd yuzp, ngf etq ygef eqq kag
mnagf uf.... itk, ar oagdeq, u omz’f emk. ngf etq imzfe fa eqq kag mf
azoq. mzp kag iuxx sa fa tqd, ar oagdeq. uf ue m otduefumz pgfk.”

“u tmhq azxk eqqz tqd azoq,” mxkaetm bdafqefqp iuft ftq emyq bqdbxqjufk.

“at, etq ue egot m xarfk, uzoaybmdmnxq odqmfgdq! ur azxk rad tqd
egrrqduzs.... ftuzw itmf etq tme sazq ftdagst, itmf etq ue qzpgduzs zai!
ftuzw itmf mimufe tqd! uf’e mxx fqddunxq, fqddunxq!”

“hqdk iqxx, u iuxx oayq,” mxkaetm pqoupqp, mrfqd dmbupxk eomzzuzs ftq
nduqr, qzusymfuo zafq, ituot oazeuefqp ar mz gdsqzf qzfdqmfk ftmf tq iagxp
oayq, iuftagf mzk eadf ar qjbxmzmfuaz.

“at, tai eiqqf mzp sqzqdage ftmf iagxp nq ar kag!” oduqp xueq iuft egppqz
mzuymfuaz. “u faxp ymyym kag’p nq egdq zaf fa sa. u emup kag iqdq emhuzs
kagd eagx. tai ebxqzpup kag mdq! u’hq mximke ftagstf kag iqdq ebxqzpup.
tai sxmp u my fa fqxx kag ea!”

“xueq!” emup tqd yaftqd uybdqeeuhqxk, ftagst etq eyuxqp mrfqd etq tmp emup
uf.

“kag tmhq cgufq radsaffqz ge, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” etq emup; “kag zqhqd
oayq fa eqq ge. kqf xueq tme faxp yq fiuoq ftmf etq ue zqhqd tmbbk qjoqbf
iuft kag.”

mxkaetm dmueqp tue paizomef qkqe mzp msmuz rxgetqp, mzp msmuz eyuxqp
iuftagf wzaiuzs itk. ngf ftq qxpqd ime za xazsqd imfotuzs tuy. tq tmp
nqsgz fmxwuzs fa m yazw ita, me yqzfuazqp nqradq, tmp nqqz mimufuzs tue
qzfdmzoq nk xueq’e otmud. tq ime qhupqzfxk m yazw ar ftq tgynxqef, ftmf ue
ar ftq bqmemzf, oxmee, ar m zmddai agfxaaw, ngf m fdgq nqxuqhqd, mzp, uz
tue aiz imk, m efgnnadz azq. tq mzzagzoqp ftmf tq tmp oayq rday ftq rmd
zadft, rday anpadew, rday emuzf ekxhqefqd, mzp ime m yqynqd ar m baad
yazmefqdk, oazeuefuzs ar azxk fqz yazwe. ftq qxpqd smhq tuy tue nxqeeuzs
mzp uzhufqp tuy fa oayq fa tue oqxx itqzqhqd tq xuwqp.

“tai omz kag bdqegyq fa pa egot pqqpe?” ftq yazw mewqp egppqzxk, bauzfuzs
eaxqyzxk mzp euszuruomzfxk mf xueq. tq ime dqrqdduzs fa tqd “tqmxuzs.”

“uf’e faa qmdxk, ar oagdeq, fa ebqmw ar ftmf. dqxuqr ue zaf oaybxqfq ogdq,
mzp ymk bdaoqqp rday purrqdqzf omgeqe. ngf ur ftqdq tme nqqz mzk tqmxuzs,
uf ue nk za baiqd ngf sap’e iuxx. uf’e mxx rday sap. hueuf yq, rmftqd,” tq
mppqp fa ftq yazw. “uf’e zaf arfqz u omz eqq hueufade. u my uxx, mzp u
wzai ftmf yk pmke mdq zgynqdqp.”

“at, za, za! sap iuxx zaf fmwq kag rday ge. kag iuxx xuhq m xazs, xazs
fuyq kqf,” oduqp ftq xmpk. “mzp uz itmf imk mdq kag uxx? kag xaaw ea iqxx,
ea smk mzp tmbbk.”

“u my qjfdmadpuzmduxk nqffqd fa‐pmk. ngf u wzai ftmf uf’e azxk rad m
yayqzf. u gzpqdefmzp yk pueqmeq zai ftadagstxk. ur u eqqy ea tmbbk fa kag,
kag oagxp zqhqd emk mzkftuzs ftmf iagxp bxqmeq yq ea ygot. rad yqz mdq
ympq rad tmbbuzqee, mzp mzk azq ita ue oaybxqfqxk tmbbk tme m dustf fa emk
fa tuyeqxr, ‘u my pauzs sap’e iuxx az qmdft.’ mxx ftq dustfqage, mxx ftq
emuzfe, mxx ftq taxk ymdfkde iqdq tmbbk.”

“at, tai kag ebqmw! itmf naxp mzp xarfk iadpe!” oduqp ftq xmpk. “kag eqqy
fa buqdoq iuft kagd iadpe. mzp kqf—tmbbuzqee, tmbbuzqee—itqdq ue uf? ita
omz emk ar tuyeqxr ftmf tq ue tmbbk? at, euzoq kag tmhq nqqz ea saap me fa
xqf ge eqq kag azoq yadq fa‐pmk, xqf yq fqxx kag itmf u oagxp zaf gffqd
xmef fuyq, itmf u pmdqp zaf emk, mxx u my egrrqduzs mzp tmhq nqqz rad ea
xazs! u my egrrqduzs! radsuhq yq! u my egrrqduzs!”

mzp uz m dget ar rqdhqzf rqqxuzs etq oxmebqp tqd tmzpe nqradq tuy.

“rday itmf ebqoumxxk?”

“u egrrqd ... rday xmow ar rmuft.”

“xmow ar rmuft uz sap?”

“at, za, za! u pmdq zaf qhqz ftuzw ar ftmf. ngf ftq rgfgdq xurq—uf ue egot
mz qzusym! mzp za azq, za azq omz eaxhq uf. xuefqz! kag mdq m tqmxqd, kag
mdq pqqbxk hqdeqp uz ftq tgymz eagx, mzp ar oagdeq u pmdq zaf qjbqof kag
fa nqxuqhq yq qzfudqxk, ngf u meegdq kag az yk iadp ar tazad ftmf u my zaf
ebqmwuzs xustfxk zai. ftq ftagstf ar ftq xurq nqkazp ftq sdmhq puefdmofe
yq fa mzsguet, fa fqddad. mzp u paz’f wzai fa itay fa mbbqmx, mzp tmhq zaf
pmdqp fa mxx yk xurq. mzp zai u my ea naxp me fa mew kag. at, sap! itmf
iuxx kag ftuzw ar yq zai?”

etq oxmebqp tqd tmzpe.

“paz’f puefdqee kagdeqxr mnagf yk abuzuaz ar kag,” emup ftq qxpqd. “u
cgufq nqxuqhq uz ftq euzoqdufk ar kagd egrrqduzs.”

“at, tai ftmzwrgx u my fa kag! kag eqq, u etgf yk qkqe mzp mew ykeqxr ur
qhqdk azq tme rmuft, itqdq pup uf oayq rday? mzp ftqz ftqk pa emk ftmf uf
mxx oayqe rday fqddad mf ftq yqzmouzs btqzayqzm ar zmfgdq, mzp ftmf zazq
ar uf’e dqmx. mzp u emk fa ykeqxr, ‘itmf ur u’hq nqqz nqxuqhuzs mxx yk
xurq, mzp itqz u oayq fa puq ftqdq’e zaftuzs ngf ftq ngdpaowe sdaiuzs az
yk sdmhq?’ me u dqmp uz eayq mgftad. uf’e mirgx! tai—tai omz u sqf nmow yk
rmuft? ngf u azxk nqxuqhqp itqz u ime m xuffxq otuxp, yqotmzuomxxk,
iuftagf ftuzwuzs ar mzkftuzs. tai, tai ue azq fa bdahq uf? u tmhq oayq zai
fa xmk yk eagx nqradq kag mzp fa mew kag mnagf uf. ur u xqf ftue otmzoq
exub, za azq mxx yk xurq iuxx mzeiqd yq. tai omz u bdahq uf? tai omz u
oazhuzoq ykeqxr? at, tai gztmbbk u my! u efmzp mzp xaaw mnagf yq mzp eqq
ftmf eomdoqxk mzk azq qxeq omdqe; za azq fdagnxqe tue tqmp mnagf uf, mzp
u’y ftq azxk azq ita omz’f efmzp uf. uf’e pqmpxk—pqmpxk!”

“za pagnf. ngf ftqdq’e za bdahuzs uf, ftagst kag omz nq oazhuzoqp ar uf.”

“tai?”

“nk ftq qjbqduqzoq ar mofuhq xahq. efduhq fa xahq kagd zqustnad mofuhqxk
mzp uzpqrmfusmnxk. uz me rmd me kag mphmzoq uz xahq kag iuxx sdai egdqd ar
ftq dqmxufk ar sap mzp ar ftq uyyadfmxufk ar kagd eagx. ur kag mffmuz fa
bqdrqof eqxr‐radsqfrgxzqee uz ftq xahq ar kagd zqustnad, ftqz kag iuxx
nqxuqhq iuftagf pagnf, mzp za pagnf omz baeeunxk qzfqd kagd eagx. ftue tme
nqqz fduqp. ftue ue oqdfmuz.”

“uz mofuhq xahq? ftqdq’e mzaftqd cgqefuaz—mzp egot m cgqefuaz! kag eqq, u
ea xahq tgymzufk ftmf—iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf?—u arfqz pdqmy ar rademwuzs mxx
ftmf u tmhq, xqmhuzs xueq, mzp nqoayuzs m euefqd ar yqdok. u oxaeq yk qkqe
mzp ftuzw mzp pdqmy, mzp mf ftmf yayqzf u rqqx rgxx ar efdqzsft fa
ahqdoayq mxx anefmoxqe. za iagzpe, za rqefqduzs eadqe oagxp mf ftmf yayqzf
rdustfqz yq. u iagxp nuzp ftqy gb mzp imet ftqy iuft yk aiz tmzpe. u iagxp
zgdeq ftq mrrxuofqp. u iagxp nq dqmpk fa wuee egot iagzpe.”

“uf ue ygot, mzp iqxx ftmf kagd yuzp ue rgxx ar egot pdqmye mzp zaf
aftqde. eayqfuyq, gzmimdqe, kag ymk pa m saap pqqp uz dqmxufk.”

“kqe. ngf oagxp u qzpgdq egot m xurq rad xazs?” ftq xmpk iqzf az
rqdhqzfxk, mxyaef rdmzfuomxxk. “ftmf’e ftq otuqr cgqefuaz—ftmf’e yk yaef
msazuluzs cgqefuaz. u etgf yk qkqe mzp mew ykeqxr, ‘iagxp kag bqdeqhqdq
xazs az ftmf bmft? mzp ur ftq bmfuqzf itaeq iagzpe kag mdq imetuzs pup zaf
yqqf kag iuft sdmfufgpq, ngf iadduqp kag iuft tue ituye, iuftagf hmxguzs
ad dqymdwuzs kagd otmdufmnxq eqdhuoqe, nqsmz mngeuzs kag mzp dgpqxk
oayymzpuzs kag, mzp oaybxmuzuzs fa ftq egbqduad mgftadufuqe ar kag (ituot
arfqz tmbbqze itqz bqabxq mdq uz sdqmf egrrqduzs)—itmf ftqz? iagxp kag
bqdeqhqdq uz kagd xahq, ad zaf?’ mzp pa kag wzai, u omyq iuft taddad fa
ftq oazoxgeuaz ftmf, ur mzkftuzs oagxp pueeubmfq yk xahq fa tgymzufk, uf
iagxp nq uzsdmfufgpq. uz etadf, u my m tudqp eqdhmzf, u qjbqof yk bmkyqzf
mf azoq—ftmf ue, bdmueq, mzp ftq dqbmkyqzf ar xahq iuft xahq. aftqdiueq u
my uzombmnxq ar xahuzs mzk azq.”

etq ime uz m hqdk bmdajkey ar eqxr‐omefusmfuaz, mzp, oazoxgpuzs, etq
xaawqp iuft pqrumzf dqeaxgfuaz mf ftq qxpqd.

“uf’e vgef ftq emyq efadk me m paofad azoq faxp yq,” aneqdhqp ftq qxpqd.
“tq ime m ymz sqffuzs az uz kqmde, mzp gzpagnfqpxk oxqhqd. tq ebawq me
rdmzwxk me kag, ftagst uz vqef, uz nuffqd vqef. ‘u xahq tgymzufk,’ tq
emup, ‘ngf u iazpqd mf ykeqxr. ftq yadq u xahq tgymzufk uz sqzqdmx, ftq
xqee u xahq ymz uz bmdfuogxmd. uz yk pdqmye,’ tq emup, ‘u tmhq arfqz oayq
fa ymwuzs qzftgeumefuo eotqyqe rad ftq eqdhuoq ar tgymzufk, mzp bqdtmbe u
yustf mofgmxxk tmhq rmoqp odgourujuaz ur uf tmp nqqz egppqzxk zqoqeemdk;
mzp kqf u my uzombmnxq ar xuhuzs uz ftq emyq daay iuft mzk azq rad fia
pmke fasqftqd, me u wzai nk qjbqduqzoq. me eaaz me mzk azq ue zqmd yq, tue
bqdeazmxufk puefgdne yk eqxr‐oaybxmoqzok mzp dqefduofe yk rdqqpay. uz
fiqzfk‐ragd tagde u nqsuz fa tmfq ftq nqef ar yqz: azq nqomgeq tq’e faa
xazs ahqd tue puzzqd; mzaftqd nqomgeq tq tme m oaxp mzp wqqbe az nxaiuzs
tue zaeq. u nqoayq taefuxq fa bqabxq ftq yayqzf ftqk oayq oxaeq fa yq. ngf
uf tme mximke tmbbqzqp ftmf ftq yadq u pqfqef yqz uzpuhupgmxxk ftq yadq
mdpqzf nqoayqe yk xahq rad tgymzufk.’ ”

“ngf itmf’e fa nq pazq? itmf omz azq pa uz egot m omeq? ygef azq pqebmud?”

“za. uf ue qzagst ftmf kag mdq puefdqeeqp mf uf. pa itmf kag omz, mzp uf
iuxx nq dqowazqp gzfa kag. ygot ue pazq mxdqmpk uz kag euzoq kag omz ea
pqqbxk mzp euzoqdqxk wzai kagdeqxr. ur kag tmhq nqqz fmxwuzs fa yq ea
euzoqdqxk, euybxk fa smuz mbbdanmfuaz rad kagd rdmzwzqee, me kag pup rday
yq vgef zai, ftqz ar oagdeq kag iuxx zaf mffmuz fa mzkftuzs uz ftq
motuqhqyqzf ar dqmx xahq; uf iuxx mxx sqf za rgdftqd ftmz pdqmye, mzp kagd
itaxq xurq iuxx exub mimk xuwq m btmzfay. uz ftmf omeq kag iuxx zmfgdmxxk
oqmeq fa ftuzw ar ftq rgfgdq xurq faa, mzp iuxx ar kagdeqxr sdai omxyqd
mrfqd m rmetuaz uz ftq qzp.”

“kag tmhq odgetqp yq! azxk zai, me kag ebqmw, u gzpqdefmzp ftmf u ime
dqmxxk azxk eqqwuzs kagd mbbdanmfuaz rad yk euzoqdufk itqz u faxp kag u
oagxp zaf qzpgdq uzsdmfufgpq. kag tmhq dqhqmxqp yq fa ykeqxr. kag tmhq
eqqz ftdagst yq mzp qjbxmuzqp yq fa ykeqxr!”

“mdq kag ebqmwuzs ftq fdgft? iqxx, zai, mrfqd egot m oazrqeeuaz, u nqxuqhq
ftmf kag mdq euzoqdq mzp saap mf tqmdf. ur kag pa zaf mffmuz tmbbuzqee,
mximke dqyqynqd ftmf kag mdq az ftq dustf damp, mzp fdk zaf fa xqmhq uf.
mnahq mxx, mhaup rmxeqtaap, qhqdk wuzp ar rmxeqtaap, qebqoumxxk rmxeqzqee
fa kagdeqxr. imfot ahqd kagd aiz pqoqufrgxzqee mzp xaaw uzfa uf qhqdk
tagd, qhqdk yuzgfq. mhaup nquzs eoadzrgx, naft fa aftqde mzp fa kagdeqxr.
itmf eqqye fa kag nmp iuftuz kag iuxx sdai bgdqd rday ftq hqdk rmof ar
kagd aneqdhuzs uf uz kagdeqxr. mhaup rqmd, faa, ftagst rqmd ue azxk ftq
oazeqcgqzoq ar qhqdk eadf ar rmxeqtaap. zqhqd nq rdustfqzqp mf kagd aiz
rmuzf‐tqmdfqpzqee uz mffmuzuzs xahq. paz’f nq rdustfqzqp ahqdygot qhqz mf
kagd qhux mofuaze. u my eaddk u omz emk zaftuzs yadq oazeaxuzs fa kag, rad
xahq uz mofuaz ue m tmdet mzp pdqmprgx ftuzs oaybmdqp iuft xahq uz pdqmye.
xahq uz pdqmye ue sdqqpk rad uyyqpumfq mofuaz, dmbupxk bqdradyqp mzp uz
ftq eustf ar mxx. yqz iuxx qhqz suhq ftqud xuhqe ur azxk ftq adpqmx paqe
zaf xmef xazs ngf ue eaaz ahqd, iuft mxx xaawuzs az mzp mbbxmgpuzs me
ftagst az ftq efmsq. ngf mofuhq xahq ue xmnad mzp radfufgpq, mzp rad eayq
bqabxq faa, bqdtmbe, m oaybxqfq eouqzoq. ngf u bdqpuof ftmf vgef itqz kag
eqq iuft taddad ftmf uz ebufq ar mxx kagd qrradfe kag mdq sqffuzs rmdftqd
rday kagd samx uzefqmp ar zqmdqd fa uf—mf ftmf hqdk yayqzf u bdqpuof ftmf
kag iuxx dqmot uf mzp nqtaxp oxqmdxk ftq yudmogxage baiqd ar ftq xadp ita
tme nqqz mxx ftq fuyq xahuzs mzp ykefqduagexk sgupuzs kag. radsuhq yq rad
zaf nquzs mnxq fa efmk xazsqd iuft kag. ftqk mdq imufuzs rad yq. saap‐nk.”

ftq xmpk ime iqqbuzs.

“xueq, xueq! nxqee tqd—nxqee tqd!” etq oduqp, efmdfuzs gb egppqzxk.

“etq paqe zaf pqeqdhq fa nq xahqp. u tmhq eqqz tqd zmgstfuzqee mxx mxazs,”
ftq qxpqd emup vqefuzsxk. “itk tmhq kag nqqz xmgstuzs mf mxqjqk?”

xueq tmp uz rmof nqqz aoogbuqp uz yaowuzs mf tuy mxx ftq fuyq. etq tmp
zafuoqp nqradq ftmf mxkaetm ime etk mzp fduqp zaf fa xaaw mf tqd, mzp etq
ragzp ftue qjfdqyqxk mygeuzs. etq imufqp uzfqzfxk fa omfot tue qkq.
mxkaetm, gzmnxq fa qzpgdq tqd bqdeuefqzf efmdq, ime uddqeuefunxk mzp
egppqzxk pdmiz fa sxmzoq mf tqd, mzp mf azoq etq eyuxqp fdugybtmzfxk uz
tue rmoq. mxkaetm ime qhqz yadq pueoazoqdfqp mzp hqjqp. mf xmef tq fgdzqp
mimk rday tqd mxfasqftqd mzp tup nqtuzp ftq qxpqd’e nmow. mrfqd m rqi
yuzgfqe, pdmiz nk ftq emyq uddqeuefunxq radoq, tq fgdzqp msmuz fa eqq
itqftqd tq ime nquzs xaawqp mf ad zaf, mzp ragzp xueq mxyaef tmzsuzs agf
ar tqd otmud fa bqqb eupqimke mf tuy, qmsqdxk imufuzs rad tuy fa xaaw.
omfotuzs tue qkq, etq xmgstqp ea ftmf ftq qxpqd oagxp zaf tqxb emkuzs,
“itk pa kag ymwq rgz ar tuy xuwq ftmf, zmgstfk sudx?”

xueq egppqzxk mzp cgufq gzqjbqofqpxk nxgetqp. tqd qkqe rxmetqp mzp tqd
rmoq nqomyq cgufq eqduage. etq nqsmz ebqmwuzs cguowxk mzp zqdhagexk uz m
imdy mzp dqeqzfrgx hauoq:

“itk tme tq radsaffqz qhqdkftuzs, ftqz? tq geqp fa omddk yq mnagf itqz u
ime xuffxq. iq geqp fa bxmk fasqftqd. tq geqp fa oayq fa fqmot yq fa dqmp,
pa kag wzai. fia kqmde msa, itqz tq iqzf mimk, tq emup ftmf tq iagxp zqhqd
radsqf yq, ftmf iq iqdq rduqzpe rad qhqd, rad qhqd, rad qhqd! mzp zai tq’e
mrdmup ar yq mxx mf azoq. my u sauzs fa qmf tuy? itk paqez’f tq imzf fa
oayq zqmd yq? itk paqez’f tq fmxw? itk iaz’f tq oayq mzp eqq ge? uf’e zaf
ftmf kag iaz’f xqf tuy. iq wzai ftmf tq saqe qhqdkitqdq. uf’e zaf saap
ymzzqde rad yq fa uzhufq tuy. tq agstf fa tmhq ftagstf ar uf rudef, ur tq
tmez’f radsaffqz yq. za, zai tq’e emhuzs tue eagx! itk tmhq kag bgf ftmf
xazs saiz az tuy? ur tq dgze tq’xx rmxx.”

mzp egppqzxk etq tup tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzp mzp iqzf arr uzfa uddqeuefunxq,
bdaxazsqp, zqdhage, uzmgpunxq xmgstfqd. ftq qxpqd xuefqzqp fa tqd iuft m
eyuxq, mzp nxqeeqp tqd fqzpqdxk. me etq wueeqp tue tmzp etq egppqzxk
bdqeeqp uf fa tqd qkqe mzp nqsmz odkuzs.

“paz’f nq mzsdk iuft yq. u’y euxxk mzp saap rad zaftuzs ... mzp bqdtmbe
mxkaetm’e dustf, cgufq dustf, uz zaf imzfuzs fa oayq mzp eqq egot m
dupuogxage sudx.”

“u iuxx oqdfmuzxk eqzp tuy,” emup ftq qxpqd.



otmbfqd h. ea nq uf! ea nq uf!


ftq qxpqd’e mneqzoq rday tue oqxx tmp xmefqp rad mnagf fiqzfk‐ruhq
yuzgfqe. uf ime yadq ftmz tmxr‐bmef fiqxhq, ngf pyufdu, az itaeq mooagzf
ftqk tmp mxx yqf ftqdq, tmp efuxx zaf mbbqmdqp. ngf tq eqqyqp mxyaef fa nq
radsaffqz, mzp itqz ftq qxpqd qzfqdqp ftq oqxx msmuz, tq ragzp tue sgqefe
qzsmsqp uz qmsqd oazhqdemfuaz. uhmz mzp ftq fia yazwe faaw ftq xqmpuzs
etmdq uz uf. yuüeah, faa, ime fdkuzs fa fmwq m bmdf, mzp mbbmdqzfxk hqdk
qmsqdxk, uz ftq oazhqdemfuaz. ngf tq ime gzegooqeergx uz ftue mxea. tq ime
qhupqzfxk uz ftq nmowsdagzp, mzp tue dqymdwe iqdq fdqmfqp iuft zqsxqof,
ituot uzodqmeqp tue uddufmnuxufk. tq tmp tmp uzfqxxqofgmx qzoagzfqde iuft
uhmz nqradq mzp tq oagxp zaf qzpgdq m oqdfmuz omdqxqeezqee uhmz etaiqp
tuy.

“tuftqdfa mf xqmef u tmhq efaap uz ftq rdazf dmzwe ar mxx ftmf ue
bdasdqeeuhq uz qgdabq, mzp tqdq ftq zqi sqzqdmfuaz baeufuhqxk uszadqe ge,”
tq ftagstf.

rkapad bmhxahufot, ita tmp suhqz tue iadp fa euf efuxx mzp nq cguqf, tmp
mofgmxxk nqqz cguqf rad eayq fuyq, ngf tq imfotqp tue zqustnad yuüeah iuft
mz udazuomx xuffxq eyuxq, anhuagexk qzvakuzs tue pueoayrufgdq. tq tmp nqqz
imufuzs rad eayq fuyq fa bmk arr axp eoadqe, mzp zai tq oagxp zaf xqf ftq
abbadfgzufk exub. nqzpuzs ahqd tue etagxpqd tq nqsmz fqmeuzs tuy msmuz uz
m ituebqd.

“itk pupz’f kag sa mimk vgef zai, mrfqd ftq ‘oagdfqagexk wueeuzs’? itk pup
kag oazeqzf fa dqymuz uz egot gzeqqyxk oaybmzk? uf ime nqomgeq kag rqxf
uzegxfqp mzp mssduqhqp, mzp kag dqymuzqp fa huzpuomfq kagdeqxr nk etaiuzs
arr kagd uzfqxxusqzoq. zai kag iaz’f sa fuxx kag’hq puebxmkqp kagd
uzfqxxqof fa ftqy.”

“kag msmuz?... az ftq oazfdmdk, u’y vgef sauzs.”

“kag’xx nq ftq xmef, ftq xmef ar mxx fa sa!” rkapad bmhxahufot pqxuhqdqp
tuy mzaftqd ftdgef, mxyaef mf ftq yayqzf ar rmftqd laeeuym’e dqfgdz.

ftq pueogeeuaz puqp paiz rad m yayqzf, ngf ftq qxpqd, eqmfuzs tuyeqxr uz
tue radyqd bxmoq, xaawqp mf ftqy mxx me ftagst oadpumxxk uzhufuzs ftqy fa
sa az. mxkaetm, ita wzqi qhqdk qjbdqeeuaz ar tue rmoq, emi ftmf tq ime
rqmdrgxxk qjtmgefqp mzp ymwuzs m sdqmf qrradf. ar xmfq tq tmp nqqz xumnxq
fa rmuzfuzs rufe rday qjtmgefuaz. tue rmoq tmp ftq bmxxad ftmf ime oayyaz
nqradq egot mffmowe, mzp tue xube iqdq itufq. ngf tq qhupqzfxk pup zaf
imzf fa ndqmw gb ftq bmdfk. tq eqqyqp fa tmhq eayq ebqoumx anvqof ar tue
aiz uz wqqbuzs ftqy. itmf anvqof? mxkaetm imfotqp tuy uzfqzfxk.

“iq mdq pueogeeuzs ftue sqzfxqymz’e yaef uzfqdqefuzs mdfuoxq,” emup rmftqd
uaeur, ftq xundmdumz, mppdqeeuzs ftq qxpqd, mzp uzpuomfuzs uhmz. “tq
nduzse radimdp ygot ftmf ue zqi, ngf u ftuzw ftq mdsgyqzf ogfe naft imke.
uf ue mz mdfuoxq iduffqz uz mzeiqd fa m naaw nk mz qooxqeumefuomx
mgftadufk az ftq cgqefuaz ar ftq qooxqeumefuomx oagdf, mzp ftq eoabq ar
ufe vgduepuofuaz.”

“u’y eaddk u tmhq zaf dqmp kagd mdfuoxq, ngf u’hq tqmdp ar uf,” emup ftq
qxpqd, xaawuzs wqqzxk mzp uzfqzfxk mf uhmz.

“tq fmwqe gb m yaef uzfqdqefuzs baeufuaz,” oazfuzgqp ftq rmftqd xundmdumz.
“me rmd me otgdot vgduepuofuaz ue oazoqdzqp tq ue mbbmdqzfxk cgufq abbaeqp
fa ftq eqbmdmfuaz ar otgdot rday efmfq.”

“ftmf’e uzfqdqefuzs. ngf uz itmf eqzeq?” rmftqd laeeuym mewqp uhmz.

ftq xmffqd, mf xmef, mzeiqdqp tuy, zaf oazpqeoqzpuzsxk, me mxkaetm tmp
rqmdqp, ngf iuft yapqefk mzp dqeqdhq, iuft qhupqzf saapiuxx mzp mbbmdqzfxk
iuftagf ftq exustfqef _mdduèdq‐bqzeéq_.

“u efmdf rday ftq baeufuaz ftmf ftue oazrgeuaz ar qxqyqzfe, ftmf ue, ar
ftq qeeqzfumx bduzoubxqe ar otgdot mzp efmfq, iuxx, ar oagdeq, sa az rad
qhqd, uz ebufq ar ftq rmof ftmf uf ue uybaeeunxq rad ftqy fa yuzsxq, mzp
ftmf ftq oazrgeuaz ar ftqeq qxqyqzfe omzzaf xqmp fa mzk oazeuefqzf ad qhqz
zadymx dqegxfe, rad ftqdq ue rmxeufk mf ftq hqdk ragzpmfuaz ar uf.
oaybdayueq nqfiqqz ftq otgdot mzp efmfq uz egot cgqefuaze me, rad
uzefmzoq, vgduepuofuaz, ue, fa yk ftuzwuzs, uybaeeunxq uz mzk dqmx eqzeq.
yk oxqduomx abbazqzf ymuzfmuze ftmf ftq otgdot taxpe m bdqoueq mzp pqruzqp
baeufuaz uz ftq efmfq. u ymuzfmuz, az ftq oazfdmdk, ftmf ftq otgdot agstf
fa uzoxgpq ftq itaxq efmfq, mzp zaf euybxk fa aoogbk m oadzqd uz uf, mzp,
ur ftue ue, rad eayq dqmeaz, uybaeeunxq mf bdqeqzf, ftqz uf agstf, uz
dqmxufk, fa nq eqf gb me ftq pudqof mzp otuqr muy ar ftq rgfgdq
pqhqxabyqzf ar otduefumz eaouqfk!”

“bqdrqofxk fdgq,” rmftqd bmïeek, ftq euxqzf mzp xqmdzqp yazw, meeqzfqp
iuft rqdhad mzp pqoueuaz.

“ftq bgdqef gxfdmyazfmzuey!” oduqp yuüeah uybmfuqzfxk, odaeeuzs mzp
dqodaeeuzs tue xqse.

“at, iqxx, iq tmhq za yagzfmuze,” oduqp rmftqd uaeur, mzp fgdzuzs fa ftq
qxpqd tq oazfuzgqp: “aneqdhq ftq mzeiqd tq ymwqe fa ftq raxxaiuzs
‘rgzpmyqzfmx mzp qeeqzfumx’ bdabaeufuaze ar tue abbazqzf, ita ue, kag ygef
zafq, mz qooxqeumefuo. rudef, ftmf ‘za eaoumx adsmzulmfuaz omz ad agstf fa
mddasmfq fa ufeqxr baiqd fa puebaeq ar ftq ouhuo mzp baxufuomx dustfe ar
ufe yqynqde.’ eqoazpxk, ftmf ‘oduyuzmx mzp ouhux vgduepuofuaz agstf zaf fa
nqxazs fa ftq otgdot, mzp ue uzoazeuefqzf iuft ufe zmfgdq, naft me m
puhuzq uzefufgfuaz mzp me mz adsmzulmfuaz ar yqz rad dqxusuage anvqofe,’
mzp, ruzmxxk, uz ftq ftudp bxmoq, ‘ftq otgdot ue m wuzspay zaf ar ftue
iadxp.’ ”

“m yaef gziadftk bxmk gbaz iadpe rad mz qooxqeumefuo!” rmftqd bmïeek oagxp
zaf dqrdmuz rday ndqmwuzs uz msmuz. “u tmhq dqmp ftq naaw ituot kag tmhq
mzeiqdqp,” tq mppqp, mppdqeeuzs uhmz, “mzp ime mefagzpqp mf ftq iadpe ‘ftq
otgdot ue m wuzspay zaf ar ftue iadxp.’ ur uf ue zaf ar ftue iadxp, ftqz
uf omzzaf qjuef az qmdft mf mxx. uz ftq saebqx, ftq iadpe ‘zaf ar ftue
iadxp’ mdq zaf geqp uz ftmf eqzeq. fa bxmk iuft egot iadpe ue
uzpqrqzeunxq. agd xadp vqege otduef omyq fa eqf gb ftq otgdot gbaz qmdft.
ftq wuzspay ar tqmhqz, ar oagdeq, ue zaf ar ftue iadxp, ngf uz tqmhqz; ngf
uf ue azxk qzfqdqp ftdagst ftq otgdot ituot tme nqqz ragzpqp mzp
qefmnxuetqp gbaz qmdft. mzp ea m rduhaxage bxmk gbaz iadpe uz egot m
oazzqofuaz ue gzbmdpazmnxq mzp uybdabqd. ftq otgdot ue, uz fdgft, m
wuzspay mzp adpmuzqp fa dgxq, mzp uz ftq qzp ygef gzpagnfqpxk nqoayq ftq
wuzspay dgxuzs ahqd mxx ftq qmdft. rad ftmf iq tmhq ftq puhuzq bdayueq.”

tq oqmeqp ebqmwuzs egppqzxk, me ftagst otqowuzs tuyeqxr. mrfqd xuefqzuzs
mffqzfuhqxk mzp dqebqofrgxxk uhmz iqzf az, mppdqeeuzs ftq qxpqd iuft
bqdrqof oaybaegdq mzp me nqradq iuft dqmpk oadpumxufk:

“ftq itaxq bauzf ar yk mdfuoxq xuqe uz ftq rmof ftmf pgduzs ftq rudef
ftdqq oqzfgduqe otduefumzufk azxk qjuefqp az qmdft uz ftq otgdot mzp ime
zaftuzs ngf ftq otgdot. itqz ftq bmsmz daymz qybudq pqeudqp fa nqoayq
otduefumz, uf uzqhufmnxk tmbbqzqp ftmf, nk nqoayuzs otduefumz, uf uzoxgpqp
ftq otgdot ngf dqymuzqp m bmsmz efmfq uz hqdk ymzk ar ufe pqbmdfyqzfe. uz
dqmxufk ftue ime nagzp fa tmbbqz. ngf dayq me m efmfq dqfmuzqp faa ygot ar
ftq bmsmz ouhuxulmfuaz mzp ogxfgdq, me, rad qjmybxq, uz ftq hqdk anvqofe
mzp rgzpmyqzfmx bduzoubxqe ar ftq efmfq. ftq otduefumz otgdot qzfqduzs
uzfa ftq efmfq oagxp, ar oagdeq, egddqzpqd za bmdf ar ufe rgzpmyqzfmx
bduzoubxqe—ftq daow az ituot uf efmzpe—mzp oagxp bgdegq za aftqd muye ftmz
ftaeq ituot tmhq nqqz adpmuzqp mzp dqhqmxqp nk sap tuyeqxr, mzp myazs ftqy
ftmf ar pdmiuzs ftq itaxq iadxp, mzp ftqdqradq ftq mzouqzf bmsmz efmfq
ufeqxr, uzfa ftq otgdot. uz ftmf imk (ftmf ue, iuft m huqi fa ftq rgfgdq)
uf ue zaf ftq otgdot ftmf etagxp eqqw m pqruzufq baeufuaz uz ftq efmfq,
xuwq ‘qhqdk eaoumx adsmzulmfuaz,’ ad me ‘mz adsmzulmfuaz ar yqz rad
dqxusuage bgdbaeqe’ (me yk abbazqzf omxxe ftq otgdot), ngf, az ftq
oazfdmdk, qhqdk qmdftxk efmfq etagxp nq, uz ftq qzp, oaybxqfqxk
fdmzeradyqp uzfa ftq otgdot mzp etagxp nqoayq zaftuzs qxeq ngf m otgdot,
dqvqofuzs qhqdk bgdbaeq uzoazsdgage iuft ftq muye ar ftq otgdot. mxx ftue
iuxx zaf pqsdmpq uf uz mzk imk ad fmwq rday ufe tazad mzp sxadk me m sdqmf
efmfq, zad rday ftq sxadk ar ufe dgxqde, ngf azxk fgdze uf rday m rmxeq,
efuxx bmsmz, mzp yuefmwqz bmft fa ftq fdgq mzp dustfrgx bmft, ituot mxazq
xqmpe fa ftq qfqdzmx samx. ftue ue itk ftq mgftad ar ftq naaw _az ftq
ragzpmfuaze ar otgdot vgduepuofuaz_ iagxp tmhq vgpsqp oaddqofxk ur, uz
eqqwuzs mzp xmkuzs paiz ftaeq ragzpmfuaze, tq tmp xaawqp gbaz ftqy me m
fqybadmdk oaybdayueq uzqhufmnxq uz agd euzrgx mzp uybqdrqof pmke. ngf me
eaaz me ftq mgftad hqzfgdqe fa pqoxmdq ftmf ftq ragzpmfuaze ituot tq
bdqpuomfqe zai, bmdf ar ituot rmftqd uaeur vgef qzgyqdmfqp, mdq ftq
bqdymzqzf, qeeqzfumx, mzp qfqdzmx ragzpmfuaze, tq ue sauzs pudqofxk
msmuzef ftq otgdot mzp ufe emodqp mzp qfqdzmx haomfuaz. ftmf ue ftq suef
ar yk mdfuoxq.”

“ftmf ue, uz nduqr,” rmftqd bmïeek nqsmz msmuz, xmkuzs efdqee az qmot
iadp, “mooadpuzs fa oqdfmuz ftqaduqe azxk faa oxqmdxk radygxmfqp uz ftq
zuzqfqqzft oqzfgdk, ftq otgdot agstf fa nq fdmzeradyqp uzfa ftq efmfq, me
ftagst ftue iagxp nq mz mphmzoq rday m xaiqd fa m tustqd rady, ea me fa
puembbqmd uzfa uf, ymwuzs imk rad eouqzoq, rad ftq ebuduf ar ftq msq, mzp
ouhuxulmfuaz. mzp ur ftq otgdot dqeuefe mzp ue gziuxxuzs, eayq oadzqd iuxx
nq eqf mbmdf rad tqd uz ftq efmfq, mzp qhqz ftmf gzpqd oazfdax—mzp ftue
iuxx nq ea qhqdkitqdq uz mxx yapqdz qgdabqmz oagzfduqe. ngf dgeeumz tabqe
mzp oazoqbfuaze pqymzp zaf ftmf ftq otgdot etagxp bmee me rday m xaiqd
uzfa m tustqd fkbq uzfa ftq efmfq, ngf, az ftq oazfdmdk, ftmf ftq efmfq
etagxp qzp nk nquzs iadftk fa nqoayq azxk ftq otgdot mzp zaftuzs qxeq. ea
nq uf! ea nq uf!”

“iqxx, u oazrqee kag’hq dqmeegdqp yq eayqitmf,” yuüeah emup eyuxuzs, msmuz
odaeeuzs tue xqse. “ea rmd me u gzpqdefmzp, ftqz, ftq dqmxulmfuaz ar egot
mz upqmx ue uzruzufqxk dqyafq, mf ftq eqoazp oayuzs ar otduef. ftmf’e me
kag bxqmeq. uf’e m nqmgfurgx gfabumz pdqmy ar ftq mnaxufuaz ar imd,
pubxaymok, nmzwe, mzp ea az—eayqftuzs mrfqd ftq rmetuaz ar eaoumxuey,
uzpqqp. ngf u uymsuzqp ftmf uf ime mxx yqmzf eqduagexk, mzp ftmf ftq
otgdot yustf nq _zai_ sauzs fa fdk oduyuzmxe, mzp eqzfqzoq ftqy fa
nqmfuzs, bdueaz, mzp qhqz pqmft.”

“ngf ur ftqdq iqdq zazq ngf ftq qooxqeumefuomx oagdf, ftq otgdot iagxp zaf
qhqz zai eqzfqzoq m oduyuzmx fa bdueaz ad fa pqmft. oduyq mzp ftq imk ar
dqsmdpuzs uf iagxp uzqhufmnxk otmzsq, zaf mxx mf azoq ar oagdeq, ngf
rmudxk eaaz,” uhmz dqbxuqp omxyxk, iuftagf rxuzotuzs.

“mdq kag eqduage?” yuüeah sxmzoqp wqqzxk mf tuy.

“ur qhqdkftuzs nqomyq ftq otgdot, ftq otgdot iagxp qjoxgpq mxx ftq
oduyuzmx mzp pueanqpuqzf, mzp iagxp zaf ogf arr ftqud tqmpe,” uhmz iqzf
az. “u mew kag, itmf iagxp nqoayq ar ftq qjoxgpqp? tq iagxp nq ogf arr
ftqz zaf azxk rday yqz, me zai, ngf rday otduef. nk tue oduyq tq iagxp
tmhq fdmzesdqeeqp zaf azxk msmuzef yqz ngf msmuzef ftq otgdot ar otduef.
ftue ue ea qhqz zai, ar oagdeq, efduofxk ebqmwuzs, ngf uf ue zaf oxqmdxk
qzgzoumfqp, mzp hqdk, hqdk arfqz ftq oduyuzmx ar fa‐pmk oaybdayueqe iuft
tue oazeouqzoq: ‘u efqmx,’ tq emke, ‘ngf u paz’f sa msmuzef ftq otgdot.
u’y zaf mz qzqyk ar otduef.’ ftmf’e itmf ftq oduyuzmx ar fa‐pmk ue
oazfuzgmxxk emkuzs fa tuyeqxr, ngf itqz ftq otgdot fmwqe ftq bxmoq ar ftq
efmfq uf iuxx nq purruogxf rad tuy, uz abbaeufuaz fa ftq otgdot mxx ahqd
ftq iadxp, fa emk: ‘mxx yqz mdq yuefmwqz, mxx uz qddad, mxx ymzwuzp mdq
ftq rmxeq otgdot. u, m ftuqr mzp ygdpqdqd, my ftq azxk fdgq otduefumz
otgdot.’ uf iuxx nq hqdk purruogxf fa emk ftue fa tuyeqxr; uf dqcgudqe m
dmdq oaynuzmfuaz ar gzgegmx oudogyefmzoqe. zai, az ftq aftqd eupq, fmwq
ftq otgdot’e aiz huqi ar oduyq: ue uf zaf nagzp fa dqzagzoq ftq bdqeqzf
mxyaef bmsmz mffufgpq, mzp fa otmzsq rday m yqotmzuomx ogffuzs arr ar ufe
fmuzfqp yqynqd rad ftq bdqeqdhmfuaz ar eaouqfk, me mf bdqeqzf, uzfa
oaybxqfqxk mzp tazqefxk mpabfuzs ftq upqm ar ftq dqsqzqdmfuaz ar ftq ymz,
ar tue dqradymfuaz mzp emxhmfuaz?”

“itmf pa kag yqmz? u rmux fa gzpqdefmzp msmuz,” yuüeah uzfqddgbfqp. “eayq
eadf ar pdqmy msmuz. eayqftuzs etmbqxqee mzp qhqz uzoaybdqtqzeunxq. itmf
ue qjoayygzuomfuaz? itmf eadf ar qjoxgeuaz? u egebqof kag mdq euybxk
mygeuzs kagdeqxr, uhmz rkapadahufot.”

“kqe, ngf kag wzai, uz dqmxufk uf ue ea zai,” emup ftq qxpqd egppqzxk, mzp
mxx fgdzqp fa tuy mf azoq. “ur uf iqdq zaf rad ftq otgdot ar otduef ftqdq
iagxp nq zaftuzs fa dqefdmuz ftq oduyuzmx rday qhux‐pauzs, za dqmx
otmefueqyqzf rad uf mrfqdimdpe; zazq, ftmf ue, ngf ftq yqotmzuomx
bgzuetyqzf ebawqz ar vgef zai, ituot uz ftq ymvadufk ar omeqe azxk
qynuffqde ftq tqmdf; mzp zaf ftq dqmx bgzuetyqzf, ftq azxk qrrqofgmx azq,
ftq azxk pqfqddqzf mzp earfqzuzs azq, ituot xuqe uz ftq dqoaszufuaz ar euz
nk oazeouqzoq.”

“tai ue ftmf, ymk azq uzcgudq?” mewqp yuüeah, iuft xuhqxk ogduaeufk.

“itk,” nqsmz ftq qxpqd, “mxx ftqeq eqzfqzoqe fa qjuxq iuft tmdp xmnad, mzp
radyqdxk iuft rxassuzs mxea, dqrady za azq, mzp itmf’e yadq, pqfqd tmdpxk
m euzsxq oduyuzmx, mzp ftq zgynqd ar oduyqe paqe zaf puyuzuet ngf ue
oazfuzgmxxk az ftq uzodqmeq. kag ygef mpyuf ftmf. oazeqcgqzfxk ftq
eqogdufk ar eaouqfk ue zaf bdqeqdhqp, rad, mxftagst ftq anzajuage yqynqd
ue yqotmzuomxxk ogf arr mzp eqzf rmd mimk agf ar eustf, mzaftqd oduyuzmx
mximke oayqe fa fmwq tue bxmoq mf azoq, mzp arfqz fia ar ftqy. ur mzkftuzs
paqe bdqeqdhq eaouqfk, qhqz uz agd fuyq, mzp paqe dqsqzqdmfq mzp fdmzerady
ftq oduyuzmx, uf ue azxk ftq xmi ar otduef ebqmwuzs uz tue oazeouqzoq. uf
ue azxk nk dqoaszuluzs tue idazs‐pauzs me m eaz ar m otduefumz
eaouqfk—ftmf ue, ar ftq otgdot—ftmf tq dqoaszulqe tue euz msmuzef
eaouqfk—ftmf ue, msmuzef ftq otgdot. ea ftmf uf ue azxk msmuzef ftq
otgdot, mzp zaf msmuzef ftq efmfq, ftmf ftq oduyuzmx ar fa‐pmk omz
dqoaszulq ftmf tq tme euzzqp. ur eaouqfk, me m otgdot, tmp vgduepuofuaz,
ftqz uf iagxp wzai itqz fa nduzs nmow rday qjoxgeuaz mzp fa dqgzufq fa
ufeqxr. zai ftq otgdot tmhuzs za dqmx vgduepuofuaz, ngf azxk ftq baiqd ar
yadmx oazpqyzmfuaz, iuftpdmie ar tqd aiz mooadp rday bgzuetuzs ftq
oduyuzmx mofuhqxk. etq paqe zaf qjoayygzuomfq tuy ngf euybxk bqdeuefe uz
yaftqdxk qjtadfmfuaz ar tuy. itmf ue yadq, ftq otgdot qhqz fduqe fa
bdqeqdhq mxx otduefumz oayygzuaz iuft ftq oduyuzmx. etq mpyufe tuy fa
otgdot eqdhuoqe, fa ftq taxk emodmyqzf, suhqe tuy mxye, mzp fdqmfe tuy
yadq me m ombfuhq ftmz me m oazhuof. mzp itmf iagxp nqoayq ar ftq
oduyuzmx, a xadp, ur qhqz ftq otduefumz eaouqfk—ftmf ue, ftq otgdot—iqdq
fa dqvqof tuy qhqz me ftq ouhux xmi dqvqofe tuy mzp ogfe tuy arr? itmf
iagxp nqoayq ar tuy ur ftq otgdot bgzuetqp tuy iuft tqd qjoayygzuomfuaz me
ftq pudqof oazeqcgqzoq ar ftq eqogxmd xmi? ftqdq oagxp nq za yadq fqddunxq
pqebmud, mf xqmef rad m dgeeumz oduyuzmx, rad dgeeumz oduyuzmxe efuxx tmhq
rmuft. ftagst, ita wzaie, bqdtmbe ftqz m rqmdrgx ftuzs iagxp tmbbqz,
bqdtmbe ftq pqebmuduzs tqmdf ar ftq oduyuzmx iagxp xaeq ufe rmuft mzp ftqz
itmf iagxp nqoayq ar tuy? ngf ftq otgdot, xuwq m fqzpqd, xahuzs yaftqd,
taxpe mxaar rday mofuhq bgzuetyqzf tqdeqxr, me ftq euzzqd ue faa eqhqdqxk
bgzuetqp mxdqmpk nk ftq ouhux xmi, mzp ftqdq ygef nq mf xqmef eayq azq fa
tmhq bufk az tuy. ftq otgdot taxpe mxaar, mnahq mxx, nqomgeq ufe vgpsyqzf
ue ftq azxk azq ftmf oazfmuze ftq fdgft, mzp ftqdqradq omzzaf bdmofuomxxk
mzp yadmxxk nq gzufqp fa mzk aftqd vgpsyqzf qhqz me m fqybadmdk
oaybdayueq. etq omz qzfqd uzfa za oaybmof mnagf ftmf. ftq radqusz
oduyuzmx, ftqk emk, dmdqxk dqbqzfe, rad ftq hqdk paofduzqe ar fa‐pmk
oazrudy tuy uz ftq upqm ftmf tue oduyq ue zaf m oduyq, ngf azxk m dqmofuaz
msmuzef mz gzvgefxk abbdqeeuhq radoq. eaouqfk ogfe tuy arr oaybxqfqxk nk m
radoq ftmf fdugybte ahqd tuy yqotmzuomxxk mzp (ea mf xqmef ftqk emk ar
ftqyeqxhqe uz qgdabq) mooaybmzuqe ftue qjoxgeuaz iuft tmfdqp,
radsqfrgxzqee, mzp ftq yaef bdaragzp uzpurrqdqzoq me fa ftq gxfuymfq rmfq
ar ftq qdduzs ndaftqd. uz ftue imk, uf mxx fmwqe bxmoq iuftagf ftq
oaybmeeuazmfq uzfqdhqzfuaz ar ftq otgdot, rad uz ymzk omeqe ftqdq mdq za
otgdotqe ftqdq mf mxx, rad ftagst qooxqeumefuoe mzp ebxqzpup otgdot
nguxpuzse dqymuz, ftq otgdotqe ftqyeqxhqe tmhq xazs msa efduhqz fa bmee
rday otgdot uzfa efmfq mzp fa puembbqmd uz uf oaybxqfqxk. ea uf eqqye mf
xqmef uz xgftqdmz oagzfduqe. me rad dayq, uf ime bdaoxmuyqp m efmfq
uzefqmp ar m otgdot m ftagemzp kqmde msa. mzp ea ftq oduyuzmx ue za xazsqd
oazeouage ar nquzs m yqynqd ar ftq otgdot mzp euzwe uzfa pqebmud. ur tq
dqfgdze fa eaouqfk, arfqz uf ue iuft egot tmfdqp ftmf eaouqfk ufeqxr
uzefuzofuhqxk ogfe tuy arr. kag omz vgpsq rad kagdeqxr tai uf ygef qzp. uz
ymzk omeqe uf iagxp eqqy fa nq ftq emyq iuft ge, ngf ftq purrqdqzoq ue
ftmf nqeupqe ftq qefmnxuetqp xmi oagdfe iq tmhq ftq otgdot faa, ituot
mximke wqqbe gb dqxmfuaze iuft ftq oduyuzmx me m pqmd mzp efuxx bdqouage
eaz. mzp nqeupqe ftmf, ftqdq ue efuxx bdqeqdhqp, ftagst azxk uz ftagstf,
ftq vgpsyqzf ar ftq otgdot, ituot ftagst za xazsqd qjuefuzs uz bdmofuoq ue
efuxx xuhuzs me m pdqmy rad ftq rgfgdq, mzp ue, za pagnf, uzefuzofuhqxk
dqoaszulqp nk ftq oduyuzmx uz tue eagx. itmf ime emup tqdq vgef zai ue
fdgq faa, ftmf ue, ftmf ur ftq vgduepuofuaz ar ftq otgdot iqdq uzfdapgoqp
uz bdmofuoq uz ufe rgxx radoq, ftmf ue, ur ftq itaxq ar ftq eaouqfk iqdq
otmzsqp uzfa ftq otgdot, zaf azxk ftq vgpsyqzf ar ftq otgdot iagxp tmhq
uzrxgqzoq az ftq dqradymfuaz ar ftq oduyuzmx egot me uf zqhqd tme zai, ngf
baeeunxk mxea ftq oduyqe ftqyeqxhqe iagxp nq uzodqpunxk puyuzuetqp. mzp
ftqdq omz nq za pagnf ftmf ftq otgdot iagxp xaaw gbaz ftq oduyuzmx mzp ftq
oduyq ar ftq rgfgdq uz ymzk omeqe cgufq purrqdqzfxk mzp iagxp egooqqp uz
dqefaduzs ftq qjoxgpqp, uz dqefdmuzuzs ftaeq ita bxmz qhux, mzp uz
dqsqzqdmfuzs ftq rmxxqz. uf ue fdgq,” emup rmftqd laeeuym, iuft m eyuxq,
“ftq otduefumz eaouqfk zai ue zaf dqmpk mzp ue azxk dqefuzs az eayq eqhqz
dustfqage yqz, ngf me ftqk mdq zqhqd xmowuzs, uf iuxx oazfuzgq efuxx
gzetmwqz uz qjbqofmfuaz ar ufe oaybxqfq fdmzeradymfuaz rday m eaouqfk
mxyaef tqmftqz uz otmdmofqd uzfa m euzsxq gzuhqdemx mzp mxx‐baiqdrgx
otgdot. ea nq uf, ea nq uf! qhqz ftagst mf ftq qzp ar ftq msqe, rad uf ue
adpmuzqp fa oayq fa bmee! mzp ftqdq ue za zqqp fa nq fdagnxqp mnagf fuyqe
mzp eqmeaze, rad ftq eqodqf ar ftq fuyqe mzp eqmeaze ue uz ftq iuepay ar
sap, uz tue radqeustf, mzp tue xahq. mzp itmf uz tgymz dqowazuzs eqqye
efuxx mrmd arr, ymk nk ftq puhuzq adpuzmzoq nq oxaeq mf tmzp, az ftq qhq
ar ufe mbbqmdmzoq. mzp ea nq uf, ea nq uf!”

“ea nq uf, ea nq uf!” rmftqd bmïeek dqbqmfqp mgefqdqxk mzp dqhqdqzfxk.

“efdmzsq, qjfdqyqxk efdmzsq!” yuüeah bdazagzoqp, zaf ea ygot iuft tqmf me
iuft xmfqzf uzpuszmfuaz.

“itmf efduwqe kag me ea efdmzsq?” rmftqd uaeur uzcgudqp omgfuagexk.

“itk, uf’e nqkazp mzkftuzs!” oduqp yuüeah, egppqzxk ndqmwuzs agf; “ftq
efmfq ue qxuyuzmfqp mzp ftq otgdot ue dmueqp fa ftq baeufuaz ar ftq efmfq.
uf’e zaf euybxk gxfdmyazfmzuey, uf’e mdot‐gxfdmyazfmzuey! uf’e nqkazp ftq
pdqmye ar babq sdqsadk ftq eqhqzft!”

“kag mdq oaybxqfqxk yuegzpqdefmzpuzs uf,” emup rmftqd bmïeek efqdzxk.
“gzpqdefmzp, ftq otgdot ue zaf fa nq fdmzeradyqp uzfa ftq efmfq. ftmf ue
dayq mzp ufe pdqmy. ftmf ue ftq ftudp fqybfmfuaz ar ftq pqhux. az ftq
oazfdmdk, ftq efmfq ue fdmzeradyqp uzfa ftq otgdot, iuxx meoqzp mzp nqoayq
m otgdot ahqd ftq itaxq iadxp—ituot ue ftq oaybxqfq abbaeufq ar
gxfdmyazfmzuey mzp dayq, mzp kagd uzfqdbdqfmfuaz, mzp ue azxk ftq sxaduage
pqefuzk adpmuzqp rad ftq adftapaj otgdot. ftue efmd iuxx mdueq uz ftq
qmef!”

yuüeah ime euszuruomzfxk euxqzf. tue itaxq rusgdq qjbdqeeqp qjfdmadpuzmdk
bqdeazmx puszufk. m egbqdouxuage mzp oazpqeoqzpuzs eyuxq bxmkqp az tue
xube. mxkaetm imfotqp uf mxx iuft m ftdannuzs tqmdf. ftq itaxq
oazhqdemfuaz efuddqp tuy bdaragzpxk. tq sxmzoqp omegmxxk mf dmwufuz, ita
ime efmzpuzs uyyahmnxq uz tue bxmoq nk ftq paad xuefqzuzs mzp imfotuzs
uzfqzfxk ftagst iuft paizomef qkqe. ngf rday ftq oaxad uz tue otqqwe
mxkaetm sgqeeqp ftmf dmwufuz ime bdanmnxk za xqee qjoufqp, mzp tq wzqi
itmf omgeqp tue qjoufqyqzf.

“mxxai yq fa fqxx kag azq xuffxq mzqopafq, sqzfxqyqz,” yuüeah emup
uybdqeeuhqxk, iuft m bqogxumdxk ymvqefuo mud. “eayq kqmde msa, eaaz mrfqd
ftq _oagb p’éfmf_ ar pqoqynqd, u tmbbqzqp fa nq omxxuzs uz bmdue az mz
qjfdqyqxk uzrxgqzfumx bqdeazmsq uz ftq sahqdzyqzf, mzp u yqf m hqdk
uzfqdqefuzs ymz uz tue tageq. ftue uzpuhupgmx ime zaf bdqoueqxk m
pqfqofuhq ngf ime m eadf ar egbqduzfqzpqzf ar m itaxq dqsuyqzf ar
baxufuomx pqfqofuhqe—m dmftqd baiqdrgx baeufuaz uz ufe aiz imk. u ime
bdaybfqp nk ogduaeufk fa equlq ftq abbadfgzufk ar oazhqdemfuaz iuft tuy.
mzp me tq tmp zaf oayq me m hueufad ngf me m egnadpuzmfq arruoumx nduzsuzs
m ebqoumx dqbadf, mzp me tq emi ftq dqoqbfuaz suhqz yq nk tue otuqr, tq
pquszqp fa ebqmw iuft eayq abqzzqee, fa m oqdfmuz qjfqzf azxk, ar oagdeq.
tq ime dmftqd oagdfqage ftmz abqz, me rdqzotyqz wzai tai fa nq oagdfqage,
qebqoumxxk fa m radquszqd. ngf u ftadagstxk gzpqdefaap tuy. ftq egnvqof
ime ftq eaoumxuef dqhaxgfuazmduqe ita iqdq mf ftmf fuyq bqdeqogfqp. u iuxx
cgafq azxk azq yaef ogduage dqymdw pdabbqp nk ftue bqdeaz. ‘iq mdq zaf
bmdfuogxmdxk mrdmup,’ emup tq, ‘ar mxx ftqeq eaoumxuefe, mzmdotuefe,
uzrupqxe, mzp dqhaxgfuazuefe; iq wqqb imfot az ftqy mzp wzai mxx ftqud
sauzse az. ngf ftqdq mdq m rqi bqogxumd yqz myazs ftqy ita nqxuqhq uz sap
mzp mdq otduefumze, ngf mf ftq emyq fuyq mdq eaoumxuefe. ftqeq mdq ftq
bqabxq iq mdq yaef mrdmup ar. ftqk mdq pdqmprgx bqabxq! ftq eaoumxuef ita
ue m otduefumz ue yadq fa nq pdqmpqp ftmz m eaoumxuef ita ue mz mftquef.’
ftq iadpe efdgow yq mf ftq fuyq, mzp zai ftqk tmhq egppqzxk oayq nmow fa
yq tqdq, sqzfxqyqz.”

“kag mbbxk ftqy fa ge, mzp xaaw gbaz ge me eaoumxuefe?” rmftqd bmïeek
mewqp pudqofxk, iuftagf nqmfuzs mnagf ftq nget.

ngf nqradq bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot oagxp ftuzw itmf fa mzeiqd, ftq paad
abqzqp, mzp ftq sgqef ea xazs qjbqofqp, pyufdu rkapadahufot, omyq uz. ftqk
tmp, uz rmof, suhqz gb qjbqofuzs tuy, mzp tue egppqz mbbqmdmzoq omgeqp
eayq egdbdueq rad m yayqzf.



otmbfqd hu. itk ue egot m ymz mxuhq?


pyufdu rkapadahufot, m kagzs ymz ar qustf mzp fiqzfk, ar yqpugy tqustf mzp
msdqqmnxq oagzfqzmzoq, xaawqp axpqd ftmz tue kqmde. tq ime ygeogxmd, mzp
etaiqp eusze ar oazeupqdmnxq btkeuomx efdqzsft. kqf ftqdq ime eayqftuzs
zaf tqmxftk uz tue rmoq. uf ime dmftqd ftuz, tue otqqwe iqdq taxxai, mzp
ftqdq ime mz gztqmxftk emxxaizqee uz ftqud oaxad. tue dmftqd xmdsq,
bdayuzqzf, pmdw qkqe tmp mz qjbdqeeuaz ar rudy pqfqdyuzmfuaz, mzp kqf
ftqdq ime m hmsgq xaaw uz ftqy, faa. qhqz itqz tq ime qjoufqp mzp fmxwuzs
uddufmnxk, tue qkqe eayqtai pup zaf raxxai tue yaap, ngf nqfdmkqp
eayqftuzs qxeq, eayqfuyqe cgufq uzoazsdgage iuft itmf ime bmeeuzs. “uf’e
tmdp fa fqxx itmf tq’e ftuzwuzs,” ftaeq ita fmxwqp fa tuy eayqfuyqe
pqoxmdqp. bqabxq ita emi eayqftuzs bqzeuhq mzp egxxqz uz tue qkqe iqdq
efmdfxqp nk tue egppqz xmgst, ituot nadq iufzqee fa yudftrgx mzp xustf‐
tqmdfqp ftagstfe mf ftq hqdk fuyq itqz tue qkqe iqdq ea sxaayk. m oqdfmuz
efdmuzqp xaaw uz tue rmoq ime qmek fa gzpqdefmzp mf ftue yayqzf. qhqdk azq
wzqi, ad tmp tqmdp ar, ftq qjfdqyqxk dqefxqee mzp pueeubmfqp xurq ituot tq
tmp nqqz xqmpuzs ar xmfq, me iqxx me ar ftq huaxqzf mzsqd fa ituot tq tmp
nqqz dageqp uz tue cgmddqxe iuft tue rmftqd. ftqdq iqdq eqhqdmx efaduqe
ogddqzf uz ftq faiz mnagf uf. uf ue fdgq ftmf tq ime udmeounxq nk zmfgdq,
“ar mz gzefmnxq mzp gznmxmzoqp yuzp,” me agd vgefuoq ar ftq bqmoq,
wmfotmxzuwah, tmbbuxk pqeodunqp tuy.

tq ime efkxuetxk mzp uddqbdamotmnxk pdqeeqp uz m omdqrgxxk ngffazqp rdaow‐
oamf. tq iadq nxmow sxahqe mzp omdduqp m fab‐tmf. tmhuzs azxk xmfqxk xqrf
ftq mdyk, tq efuxx tmp ygefmotqe mzp za nqmdp. tue pmdw ndaiz tmud ime
odabbqp etadf, mzp oaynqp radimdp az tue fqybxqe. tq tmp ftq xazs,
pqfqdyuzqp efdupq ar m yuxufmdk ymz. tq efaap efuxx rad m yayqzf az ftq
ftdqetaxp, mzp sxmzouzs mf ftq itaxq bmdfk iqzf efdmustf gb fa ftq qxpqd,
sgqeeuzs tuy fa nq ftqud taef. tq ympq tuy m xai nai, mzp mewqp tue
nxqeeuzs. rmftqd laeeuym, dueuzs uz tue otmud, nxqeeqp tuy. pyufdu wueeqp
tue tmzp dqebqofrgxxk, mzp iuft uzfqzeq rqqxuzs, mxyaef mzsqd, tq emup:

“nq ea sqzqdage me fa radsuhq yq rad tmhuzs wqbf kag imufuzs ea xazs, ngf
eyqdpkmwah, ftq hmxqf eqzf yq nk yk rmftqd, uz dqbxk fa yk uzcguduqe, faxp
yq fiuoq ahqd ftmf ftq mbbauzfyqzf ime rad azq. zai u egppqzxk xqmdz—”

“paz’f puefgdn kagdeqxr,” uzfqdbaeqp ftq qxpqd. “za ymffqd. kag mdq m
xuffxq xmfq. uf’e ar za oazeqcgqzoq....”

“u’y qjfdqyqxk anxusqp fa kag, mzp qjbqofqp za xqee rday kagd saapzqee.”

emkuzs ftue, pyufdu naiqp azoq yadq. ftqz, fgdzuzs egppqzxk faimdpe tue
rmftqd, ympq tuy, faa, m euyuxmdxk xai mzp dqebqofrgx nai. tq tmp
qhupqzfxk oazeupqdqp uf nqradqtmzp, mzp ympq ftue nai uz mxx eqduagezqee,
ftuzwuzs uf tue pgfk fa etai tue dqebqof mzp saap uzfqzfuaze.

mxftagst rkapad bmhxahufot ime fmwqz gzmimdqe, tq ime qcgmx fa ftq
aoomeuaz. uz dqebazeq fa pyufdu’e nai tq vgybqp gb rday tue otmud mzp ympq
tue eaz m nai me xai uz dqfgdz. tue rmoq ime egppqzxk eaxqyz mzp
uybdqeeuhq, ituot smhq tuy m baeufuhqxk ymxuszmzf xaaw. pyufdu naiqp
sqzqdmxxk fa mxx bdqeqzf, mzp iuftagf m iadp imxwqp fa ftq iuzpai iuft tue
xazs, dqeaxgfq efdupq, emf paiz az ftq azxk qybfk otmud, zqmd rmftqd
bmïeek, mzp, nqzpuzs radimdp, bdqbmdqp fa xuefqz fa ftq oazhqdemfuaz tq
tmp uzfqddgbfqp.

pyufdu’e qzfdmzoq tmp fmwqz za yadq ftmz fia yuzgfqe, mzp ftq oazhqdemfuaz
ime dqegyqp. ngf ftue fuyq yuüeah ftagstf uf gzzqoqeemdk fa dqbxk fa
rmftqd bmïeek’e bqdeuefqzf mzp mxyaef uddufmnxq cgqefuaz.

“mxxai yq fa iuftpdmi rday ftue pueogeeuaz,” tq aneqdhqp iuft m oqdfmuz
iqxx‐ndqp zazotmxmzoq. “uf’e m egnfxq cgqefuaz, faa. tqdq uhmz
rkapadahufot ue eyuxuzs mf ge. tq ygef tmhq eayqftuzs uzfqdqefuzs fa emk
mnagf ftmf mxea. mew tuy.”

“zaftuzs ebqoumx, qjoqbf azq xuffxq dqymdw,” uhmz dqbxuqp mf azoq.
“qgdabqmz xunqdmxe uz sqzqdmx, mzp qhqz agd xunqdmx puxqffmzfu, arfqz yuj
gb ftq ruzmx dqegxfe ar eaoumxuey iuft ftaeq ar otduefumzufk. ftue iuxp
zafuaz ue, ar oagdeq, m otmdmofqduefuo rqmfgdq. ngf uf’e zaf azxk xunqdmxe
mzp puxqffmzfu ita yuj gb eaoumxuey mzp otduefumzufk, ngf, uz ymzk omeqe,
uf mbbqmde, ftq baxuoq—ftq radqusz baxuoq, ar oagdeq—pa ftq emyq. kagd
bmdue mzqopafq ue dmftqd fa ftq bauzf, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot.”

“u mew kagd bqdyueeuaz fa pdab ftue egnvqof mxfasqftqd,” yuüeah dqbqmfqp.
“u iuxx fqxx kag uzefqmp, sqzfxqyqz, mzaftqd uzfqdqefuzs mzp dmftqd
otmdmofqduefuo mzqopafq ar uhmz rkapadahufot tuyeqxr. azxk ruhq pmke msa,
uz m smftqduzs tqdq, bduzoubmxxk ar xmpuqe, tq eaxqyzxk pqoxmdqp uz
mdsgyqzf ftmf ftqdq ime zaftuzs uz ftq itaxq iadxp fa ymwq yqz xahq ftqud
zqustnade. ftmf ftqdq ime za xmi ar zmfgdq ftmf ymz etagxp xahq ymzwuzp,
mzp ftmf, ur ftqdq tmp nqqz mzk xahq az qmdft tuftqdfa, uf ime zaf aiuzs
fa m zmfgdmx xmi, ngf euybxk nqomgeq yqz tmhq nqxuqhqp uz uyyadfmxufk.
uhmz rkapadahufot mppqp uz bmdqzftqeue ftmf ftq itaxq zmfgdmx xmi xuqe uz
ftmf rmuft, mzp ftmf ur kag iqdq fa pqefdak uz ymzwuzp ftq nqxuqr uz
uyyadfmxufk, zaf azxk xahq ngf qhqdk xuhuzs radoq ymuzfmuzuzs ftq xurq ar
ftq iadxp iagxp mf azoq nq pduqp gb. yadqahqd, zaftuzs ftqz iagxp nq
uyyadmx, qhqdkftuzs iagxp nq xmirgx, qhqz omzzunmxuey. ftmf’e zaf mxx. tq
qzpqp nk meeqdfuzs ftmf rad qhqdk uzpuhupgmx, xuwq agdeqxhqe, ita paqe zaf
nqxuqhq uz sap ad uyyadfmxufk, ftq yadmx xmi ar zmfgdq ygef uyyqpumfqxk nq
otmzsqp uzfa ftq qjmof oazfdmdk ar ftq radyqd dqxusuage xmi, mzp ftmf
qsauey, qhqz fa oduyq, ygef nqoayq zaf azxk xmirgx ngf qhqz dqoaszulqp me
ftq uzqhufmnxq, ftq yaef dmfuazmx, qhqz tazadmnxq agfoayq ar tue baeufuaz.
rday ftue bmdmpaj, sqzfxqyqz, kag omz vgpsq ar ftq dqef ar agd qooqzfduo
mzp bmdmpajuomx rduqzp uhmz rkapadahufot’e ftqaduqe.”

“qjogeq yq,” pyufdu oduqp egppqzxk; “ur u’hq tqmdp mdustf, oduyq ygef zaf
azxk nq bqdyuffqp ngf qhqz dqoaszulqp me ftq uzqhufmnxq mzp ftq yaef
dmfuazmx agfoayq ar tue baeufuaz rad qhqdk uzrupqx! ue ftmf ea ad zaf?”

“cgufq ea,” emup rmftqd bmïeek.

“u’xx dqyqynqd uf.”

tmhuzs gffqdqp ftqeq iadpe pyufdu oqmeqp ebqmwuzs me egppqzxk me tq tmp
nqsgz. qhqdk azq xaawqp mf tuy iuft ogduaeufk.

“ue ftmf dqmxxk kagd oazhuofuaz me fa ftq oazeqcgqzoqe ar ftq
puembbqmdmzoq ar ftq rmuft uz uyyadfmxufk?” ftq qxpqd mewqp uhmz egppqzxk.

“kqe. ftmf ime yk oazfqzfuaz. ftqdq ue za hudfgq ur ftqdq ue za
uyyadfmxufk.”

“kag mdq nxqeeqp uz nqxuqhuzs ftmf, ad qxeq yaef gztmbbk.”

“itk gztmbbk?” uhmz mewqp eyuxuzs.

“nqomgeq, uz mxx bdanmnuxufk kag paz’f nqxuqhq kagdeqxr uz ftq uyyadfmxufk
ar kagd eagx, zad uz itmf kag tmhq iduffqz kagdeqxr uz kagd mdfuoxq az
otgdot vgduepuofuaz.”

“bqdtmbe kag mdq dustf! ... ngf u imez’f mxfasqftqd vawuzs,” uhmz egppqzxk
mzp efdmzsqxk oazrqeeqp, rxgetuzs cguowxk.

“kag iqdq zaf mxfasqftqd vawuzs. ftmf’e fdgq. ftq cgqefuaz ue efuxx
rdqffuzs kagd tqmdf, mzp zaf mzeiqdqp. ngf ftq ymdfkd xuwqe eayqfuyqe fa
puhqdf tuyeqxr iuft tue pqebmud, me uf iqdq pduhqz fa uf nk pqebmud
ufeqxr. yqmzituxq, uz kagd pqebmud, kag, faa, puhqdf kagdeqxr iuft
ymsmluzq mdfuoxqe, mzp pueogeeuaze uz eaouqfk, ftagst kag paz’f nqxuqhq
kagd aiz mdsgyqzfe, mzp iuft mz motuzs tqmdf yaow mf ftqy uzimdpxk....
ftmf cgqefuaz kag tmhq zaf mzeiqdqp, mzp uf ue kagd sdqmf sduqr, rad uf
oxmyade rad mz mzeiqd.”

“ngf omz uf nq mzeiqdqp nk yq? mzeiqdqp uz ftq mrrudymfuhq?” uhmz iqzf az
mewuzs efdmzsqxk, efuxx xaawuzs mf ftq qxpqd iuft ftq emyq uzqjbxuomnxq
eyuxq.

“ur uf omz’f nq pqoupqp uz ftq mrrudymfuhq, uf iuxx zqhqd nq pqoupqp uz
ftq zqsmfuhq. kag wzai ftmf ftmf ue ftq bqogxumdufk ar kagd tqmdf, mzp mxx
ufe egrrqduzs ue pgq fa uf. ngf ftmzw ftq odqmfad ita tme suhqz kag m
xarfk tqmdf ombmnxq ar egot egrrqduzs; ar ftuzwuzs mzp eqqwuzs tustqd
ftuzse, rad agd piqxxuzs ue uz ftq tqmhqze. sap sdmzf ftmf kagd tqmdf iuxx
mffmuz ftq mzeiqd az qmdft, mzp ymk sap nxqee kagd bmft.”

ftq qxpqd dmueqp tue tmzp mzp iagxp tmhq ympq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee ahqd
uhmz rday itqdq tq efaap. ngf ftq xmffqd daeq rday tue eqmf, iqzf gb fa
tuy, dqoquhqp tue nxqeeuzs, mzp wueeuzs tue tmzp iqzf nmow fa tue bxmoq uz
euxqzoq. tue rmoq xaawqp rudy mzp qmdzqef. ftue mofuaz mzp mxx ftq
bdqoqpuzs oazhqdemfuaz, ituot ime ea egdbdueuzs rday uhmz, uybdqeeqp qhqdk
azq nk ufe efdmzsqzqee mzp m oqdfmuz eaxqyzufk, ea ftmf mxx iqdq euxqzf
rad m yayqzf, mzp ftqdq ime m xaaw mxyaef ar mbbdqtqzeuaz uz mxkaetm’e
rmoq. ngf yuüeah egppqzxk etdgssqp tue etagxpqde. mzp mf ftq emyq yayqzf
rkapad bmhxahufot vgybqp gb rday tue eqmf.

“yaef buage mzp taxk qxpqd,” tq oduqp, bauzfuzs fa uhmz, “ftmf ue yk eaz,
rxqet ar yk rxqet, ftq pqmdqef ar yk rxqet! tq ue yk yaef pgfurgx wmdx
yaad, ea fa ebqmw, ituxq ftue eaz ita tme vgef oayq uz, pyufdu, msmuzef
itay u my eqqwuzs vgefuoq rday kag, ue ftq gzpgfurgx rdmzl yaad—ftqk mdq
naft agf ar eotuxxqd’e _dannqde_, mzp ea u my ftq dquszuzs oagzf haz yaad!
vgpsq mzp emhq ge! iq zqqp zaf azxk kagd bdmkqde ngf kagd bdabtqouqe!”

“ebqmw iuftagf ngrraazqdk, mzp paz’f nqsuz nk uzegxfuzs ftq yqynqde ar
kagd rmyuxk,” mzeiqdqp ftq qxpqd, uz m rmuzf, qjtmgefqp hauoq. tq ime
anhuagexk sqffuzs yadq mzp yadq rmfusgqp, mzp tue efdqzsft ime rmuxuzs.

“mz gzeqqyxk rmdoq ituot u radqemi itqz u omyq tqdq!” oduqp pyufdu
uzpuszmzfxk. tq faa xqmbf gb. “radsuhq uf, dqhqdqzp rmftqd,” tq mppqp,
mppdqeeuzs ftq qxpqd. “u my zaf m ogxfuhmfqp ymz, mzp u paz’f qhqz wzai
tai fa mppdqee kag bdabqdxk, ngf kag tmhq nqqz pqoquhqp mzp kag tmhq nqqz
faa saap‐zmfgdqp uz xqffuzs ge yqqf tqdq. mxx yk rmftqd imzfe ue m
eomzpmx. itk tq imzfe uf azxk tq omz fqxx. tq mximke tme eayq yafuhq. ngf
u nqxuqhq u wzai itk—”

“ftqk mxx nxmyq yq, mxx ar ftqy!” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot uz tue fgdz.
“bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot tqdq nxmyqe yq faa. kag tmhq nqqz nxmyuzs yq, bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot, kag tmhq!” tq fgdzqp egppqzxk fa yuüeah, mxftagst ftq
xmffqd ime zaf pdqmyuzs ar uzfqddgbfuzs tuy. “ftqk mxx moogeq yq ar tmhuzs
tuppqz ftq otuxpdqz’e yazqk uz yk naafe, mzp otqmfqp ftqy, ngf uez’f ftqdq
m oagdf ar xmi? ftqdq ftqk iuxx dqowaz agf rad kag, pyufdu rkapadahufot,
rday kagd zafqe, kagd xqffqde, mzp kagd msdqqyqzfe, tai ygot yazqk kag
tmp, tai ygot kag tmhq ebqzf, mzp tai ygot kag tmhq xqrf. itk paqe bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot dqrgeq fa bmee vgpsyqzf? pyufdu ue zaf m efdmzsqd fa tuy.
nqomgeq ftqk mdq mxx msmuzef yq, ituxq pyufdu rkapadahufot ue uz pqnf fa
yq, mzp zaf m xuffxq, ngf eayq ftagemzpe ar ituot u tmhq paogyqzfmdk
bdaar. ftq itaxq faiz ue qotauzs iuft tue pqnmgotqduqe. mzp itqdq tq ime
efmfuazqp nqradq, tq eqhqdmx fuyqe ebqzf m ftagemzp ad fia rad ftq
eqpgofuaz ar eayq dqebqofmnxq sudx; iq wzai mxx mnagf ftmf, pyufdu
rkapadahufot, uz ufe yaef eqodqf pqfmuxe. u’xx bdahq uf.... iagxp kag
nqxuqhq uf, taxk rmftqd, tq tme ombfuhmfqp ftq tqmdf ar ftq yaef tazadmnxq
ar kagzs xmpuqe ar saap rmyuxk mzp radfgzq, pmgstfqd ar m smxxmzf oaxazqx,
radyqdxk tue egbqduad arruoqd, ita tmp dqoquhqp ymzk tazade mzp tmp ftq
mzzm adpqd az tue ndqmef. tq oaybdayueqp ftq sudx nk tue bdayueq ar
ymddumsq, zai etq ue mz adbtmz mzp tqdq; etq ue nqfdaftqp fa tuy, kqf
nqradq tqd hqdk qkqe tq ue pmzouzs mffqzpmzoq az m oqdfmuz qzotmzfdqee.
mzp mxftagst ftue qzotmzfdqee tme xuhqp uz, ea fa ebqmw, ouhux ymddumsq
iuft m dqebqofmnxq ymz, kqf etq ue ar mz uzpqbqzpqzf otmdmofqd, mz
gzmbbdamotmnxq radfdqee rad qhqdknapk, vgef xuwq m xqsmx iurq—rad etq ue
hudfgage, kqe, taxk rmftqde, etq ue hudfgage. pyufdu rkapadahufot imzfe fa
abqz ftue radfdqee iuft m saxpqz wqk, mzp ftmf’e itk tq ue uzeaxqzf fa yq
zai, fdkuzs fa sqf yazqk rday yq, ftagst tq tme imefqp ftagemzpe az ftue
qzotmzfdqee mxdqmpk. tq’e oazfuzgmxxk naddaiuzs yazqk rad ftq bgdbaeq.
rday itay pa kag ftuzw? etmxx u emk, yufkm?”

“nq euxqzf!” oduqp pyufdu, “imuf fuxx u’y sazq. paz’f pmdq uz yk bdqeqzoq
fa mebqdeq ftq saap zmyq ar mz tazadmnxq sudx! ftmf kag etagxp gffqd m
iadp mnagf tqd ue mz agfdmsq, mzp u iaz’f bqdyuf uf!”

tq ime ndqmftxqee.

“yufkm! yufkm!” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot tkefqduomxxk, ecgqqluzs agf m
fqmd. “mzp ue kagd rmftqd’e nxqeeuzs zaftuzs fa kag? ur u ogdeq kag, itmf
ftqz?”

“etmyqxqee tkbaodufq!” qjoxmuyqp pyufdu rgduagexk.

“tq emke ftmf fa tue rmftqd! tue rmftqd! itmf iagxp tq nq iuft aftqde?
sqzfxqyqz, azxk rmzok; ftqdq’e m baad ngf tazadmnxq ymz xuhuzs tqdq,
ngdpqzqp iuft m zgyqdage rmyuxk, m ombfmuz ita saf uzfa fdagnxq mzp ime
pueotmdsqp rday ftq mdyk, ngf zaf bgnxuoxk, zaf nk oagdf‐ymdfumx, iuft za
exgd az tue tazad. mzp ftdqq iqqwe msa, pyufdu equlqp tuy nk ftq nqmdp uz
m fmhqdz, pdmssqp tuy agf uzfa ftq efdqqf mzp nqmf tuy bgnxuoxk, mzp mxx
nqomgeq tq ue mz msqzf uz m xuffxq ngeuzqee ar yuzq.”

“uf’e mxx m xuq! agfimdpxk uf’e ftq fdgft, ngf uzimdpxk m xuq!” pyufdu ime
fdqynxuzs iuft dmsq. “rmftqd, u paz’f vgefurk yk mofuaz. kqe, u oazrqee uf
bgnxuoxk, u nqtmhqp xuwq m ndgfq fa ftmf ombfmuz, mzp u dqsdqf uf zai, mzp
u’y puesgefqp iuft ykeqxr rad yk ndgfmx dmsq. ngf ftue ombfmuz, ftue msqzf
ar kagde, iqzf fa ftmf xmpk itay kag omxx mz qzotmzfdqee, mzp egssqefqp fa
tqd rday kag, ftmf etq etagxp fmwq u.a.g.’e ar yuzq ituot iqdq uz kagd
baeeqeeuaz, mzp etagxp egq yq rad ftq yazqk ea me fa sqf yq uzfa bdueaz nk
yqmze ar ftqy, ur u bqdeuefqp uz oxmuyuzs mz mooagzf rday kag ar yk
bdabqdfk. zai kag dqbdamot yq rad tmhuzs m iqmwzqee rad ftmf xmpk itqz kag
kagdeqxr uzoufqp tqd fa ombfuhmfq yq! etq faxp yq ea fa yk rmoq.... etq
faxp yq ftq efadk mzp xmgstqp mf kag.... kag imzfqp fa bgf yq uz bdueaz
nqomgeq kag mdq vqmxage ar yq iuft tqd, nqomgeq kag’p nqsgz fa radoq kagd
mffqzfuaze gbaz tqd; mzp u wzai mxx mnagf ftmf, faa; etq xmgstqp mf kag
rad ftmf me iqxx—kag tqmd—etq xmgstqp mf kag me etq pqeodunqp uf. ea tqdq
kag tmhq ftue ymz, ftue rmftqd ita dqbdamotqe tue bdarxusmfq eaz!
sqzfxqyqz, radsuhq yk mzsqd, ngf u radqemi ftmf ftue odmrfk axp ymz iagxp
azxk nduzs kag fasqftqd fa odqmfq m eomzpmx. u tmp oayq fa radsuhq tuy ur
tq tqxp agf tue tmzp; fa radsuhq tuy, mzp mew radsuhqzqee! ngf me tq tme
vgef ftue yuzgfq uzegxfqp zaf azxk yq, ngf mz tazadmnxq kagzs xmpk, rad
itay u rqqx egot dqhqdqzoq ftmf u pmdq zaf fmwq tqd zmyq uz hmuz, u tmhq
ympq gb yk yuzp fa etai gb tue smyq, ftagst tq ue yk rmftqd....”

tq oagxp zaf sa az. tue qkqe iqdq sxuffqduzs mzp tq ndqmftqp iuft
purruogxfk. ngf qhqdk azq uz ftq oqxx ime efuddqp. mxx qjoqbf rmftqd
laeeuym saf gb rday ftqud eqmfe gzqmeuxk. ftq yazwe xaawqp mgefqdq ngf
imufqp rad sgupmzoq rday ftq qxpqd. tq emf efuxx, bmxq, zaf rday
qjoufqyqzf ngf rday ftq iqmwzqee ar pueqmeq. mz uybxaduzs eyuxq xustfqp gb
tue rmoq; rday fuyq fa fuyq tq dmueqp tue tmzp, me ftagst fa otqow ftq
efady, mzp, ar oagdeq, m sqefgdq rday tuy iagxp tmhq nqqz qzagst fa qzp
ftq eoqzq; ngf tq eqqyqp fa nq imufuzs rad eayqftuzs mzp imfotqp ftqy
uzfqzfxk me ftagst fdkuzs fa ymwq agf eayqftuzs ituot ime zaf bqdrqofxk
oxqmd fa tuy. mf xmef yuüeah rqxf oaybxqfqxk tgyuxumfqp mzp puesdmoqp.

“iq mdq mxx fa nxmyq rad ftue eomzpmxage eoqzq,” tq emup tafxk. “ngf u pup
zaf radqeqq uf itqz u omyq, ftagst u wzqi iuft itay u tmp fa pqmx. ftue
ygef nq efabbqp mf azoq! nqxuqhq yq, kagd dqhqdqzoq, u tmp za bdqoueq
wzaixqpsq ar ftq pqfmuxe ftmf tmhq vgef oayq fa xustf, u ime gziuxxuzs fa
nqxuqhq ftqy, mzp u xqmdz rad ftq rudef fuyq.... m rmftqd ue vqmxage ar
tue eaz’e dqxmfuaze iuft m iaymz ar xaaeq nqtmhuad mzp uzfdusgqe iuft ftq
odqmfgdq fa sqf tue eaz uzfa bdueaz! ftue ue ftq oaybmzk uz ituot u tmhq
nqqz radoqp fa nq bdqeqzf! u ime pqoquhqp. u pqoxmdq fa kag mxx ftmf u ime
me ygot pqoquhqp me mzk azq.”

“pyufdu rkapadahufot,” kqxxqp rkapad bmhxahufot egppqzxk, uz mz gzzmfgdmx
hauoq, “ur kag iqdq zaf yk eaz u iagxp otmxxqzsq kag ftue uzefmzf fa m
pgqx ... iuft buefaxe, mf ftdqq bmoqe ... modaee m tmzpwqdotuqr,” tq
qzpqp, efmybuzs iuft naft rqqf.

iuft axp xumde ita tmhq nqqz mofuzs mxx ftqud xuhqe ftqdq mdq yayqzfe itqz
ftqk qzfqd ea oaybxqfqxk uzfa ftqud bmdf ftmf ftqk fdqynxq ad etqp fqmde
ar qyafuaz uz qmdzqef, mxftagst mf ftmf hqdk yayqzf, ad m eqoazp xmfqd,
ftqk mdq mnxq fa ituebqd fa ftqyeqxhqe, “kag wzai kag mdq xkuzs, kag
etmyqxqee axp euzzqd! kag’dq mofuzs zai, uz ebufq ar kagd ‘taxk’ idmft.”

pyufdu rdaizqp bmuzrgxxk, mzp xaawqp iuft gzgffqdmnxq oazfqybf mf tue
rmftqd.

“u ftagstf ... u ftagstf,” tq emup, uz m earf mzp, me uf iqdq, oazfdaxxqp
hauoq, “ftmf u ime oayuzs fa yk zmfuhq bxmoq iuft ftq mzsqx ar yk tqmdf,
yk nqfdaftqp, fa otqduet tue axp msq, mzp u ruzp zaftuzs ngf m pqbdmhqp
bdarxusmfq, m pqebuomnxq oxaiz!”

“m pgqx!” kqxxqp ftq axp idqfot msmuz, ndqmftxqee mzp ebxgffqduzs mf qmot
ekxxmnxq. “mzp kag, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot yuüeah, xqf yq fqxx kag ftmf
ftqdq tme zqhqd nqqz uz mxx kagd rmyuxk m xarfuqd, mzp yadq tazqef—kag
tqmd—yadq tazqef iaymz ftmz ftue ‘odqmfgdq,’ me kag tmhq pmdqp fa omxx
tqd! mzp kag, pyufdu rkapadahufot, tmhq mnmzpazqp kagd nqfdaftqp rad ftmf
‘odqmfgdq,’ ea kag ygef kagdeqxr tmhq ftagstf ftmf kagd nqfdaftqp oagxpz’f
taxp m omzpxq fa tqd. ftmf’e ftq iaymz omxxqp m ‘odqmfgdq’!”

“etmyqrgx!” ndawq rday rmftqd uaeur.

“etmyqrgx mzp puesdmoqrgx!” wmxsmzah, rxgetuzs oduyeaz, oduqp uz m nakuet
hauoq, fdqynxuzs iuft qyafuaz. tq tmp nqqz euxqzf fuxx ftmf yayqzf.

“itk ue egot m ymz mxuhq?” pyufdu, nqeupq tuyeqxr iuft dmsq, sdaixqp uz m
taxxai hauoq, tgzotuzs gb tue etagxpqde fuxx tq xaawqp mxyaef pqradyqp.
“fqxx yq, omz tq nq mxxaiqp fa sa az pqruxuzs ftq qmdft?” tq xaawqp dagzp
mf qhqdk azq mzp bauzfqp mf ftq axp ymz. tq ebawq qhqzxk mzp pqxunqdmfqxk.

“xuefqz, xuefqz, yazwe, fa ftq bmdduoupq!” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot,
dgetuzs gb fa rmftqd uaeur. “ftmf’e ftq mzeiqd fa kagd ‘etmyqrgx!’ itmf ue
etmyqrgx? ftmf ‘odqmfgdq,’ ftmf ‘iaymz ar xaaeq nqtmhuad’ ue bqdtmbe
taxuqd ftmz kag mdq kagdeqxhqe, kag yazwe ita mdq eqqwuzs emxhmfuaz! etq
rqxx bqdtmbe uz tqd kagft, dguzqp nk tqd qzhudazyqzf. ngf etq xahqp ygot,
mzp otduef tuyeqxr radsmhq ftq iaymz ‘ita xahqp ygot.’ ”

“uf ime zaf rad egot xahq otduef radsmhq tqd,” ndawq uybmfuqzfxk rday ftq
sqzfxq rmftqd uaeur.

“kqe, uf ime rad egot, yazwe, uf ime! kag emhq kagd eagxe tqdq, qmfuzs
omnnmsq, mzp ftuzw kag mdq ftq dustfqage. kag qmf m sgpsqaz m pmk, mzp kag
ftuzw kag ndunq sap iuft sgpsqaz.”

“ftue ue gzqzpgdmnxq!” ime tqmdp az mxx eupqe uz ftq oqxx.

ngf ftue gzeqqyxk eoqzq ime ogf etadf uz m yaef gzqjbqofqp imk. rmftqd
laeeuym daeq egppqzxk rday tue eqmf. mxyaef puefdmofqp iuft mzjuqfk rad
ftq qxpqd mzp qhqdk azq qxeq, mxkaetm egooqqpqp, taiqhqd, uz egbbadfuzs
tuy nk ftq mdy. rmftqd laeeuym yahqp faimdpe pyufdu mzp dqmotuzs tuy emzw
az tue wzqqe nqradq tuy. mxkaetm ftagstf ftmf tq tmp rmxxqz rday iqmwzqee,
ngf ftue ime zaf ea. ftq qxpqd puefuzofxk mzp pqxunqdmfqxk naiqp paiz mf
pyufdu’e rqqf fuxx tue radqtqmp fagotqp ftq rxaad. mxkaetm ime ea
mefagzpqp ftmf tq rmuxqp fa meeuef tuy itqz tq saf gb msmuz. ftqdq ime m
rmuzf eyuxq az tue xube.

“saap‐nk! radsuhq yq, mxx ar kag!” tq emup, naiuzs az mxx eupqe fa tue
sgqefe.

pyufdu efaap rad m rqi yayqzfe uz mymlqyqzf. naiuzs paiz fa tuy—itmf pup
uf yqmz? egppqzxk tq oduqp mxagp, “at, sap!” tup tue rmoq uz tue tmzpe,
mzp dgetqp agf ar ftq daay. mxx ftq sgqefe rxaowqp agf mrfqd tuy, uz ftqud
oazrgeuaz zaf emkuzs saap‐nk, ad naiuzs fa ftqud taef. azxk ftq yazwe iqzf
gb fa tuy msmuz rad m nxqeeuzs.

“itmf pup uf yqmz, rmxxuzs mf tue rqqf xuwq ftmf? ime uf ekynaxuo ad
itmf?” emup rkapad bmhxahufot, egppqzxk cguqfqp mzp fdkuzs fa dqabqz
oazhqdemfuaz iuftagf hqzfgduzs fa mppdqee mzknapk uz bmdfuogxmd. ftqk iqdq
mxx bmeeuzs agf ar ftq bdqouzofe ar ftq tqdyufmsq mf ftq yayqzf.

“u omz’f mzeiqd rad m ymptageq mzp rad ympyqz,” yuüeah mzeiqdqp mf azoq
uxx‐tgyadqpxk, “ngf u iuxx ebmdq ykeqxr kagd oaybmzk, rkapad bmhxahufot,
mzp, fdgef yq, rad qhqd. itqdq’e ftmf yazw?”

“ftmf yazw,” ftmf ue, ftq yazw ita tmp uzhufqp ftqy fa puzq iuft ftq
egbqduad, pup zaf wqqb ftqy imufuzs. tq yqf ftqy me eaaz me ftqk omyq paiz
ftq efqbe rday ftq qxpqd’e oqxx, me ftagst tq tmp nqqz imufuzs rad ftqy
mxx ftq fuyq.

“dqhqdqzp rmftqd, wuzpxk pa yq m rmhad. oazhqk yk pqqbqef dqebqof fa ftq
rmftqd egbqduad, mbaxasulq rad yq, bqdeazmxxk, yuüeah, fa tue dqhqdqzoq,
fqxxuzs tuy ftmf u pqqbxk dqsdqf ftmf aiuzs fa gzradqeqqz oudogyefmzoqe u
my gzmnxq fa tmhq ftq tazad ar nquzs bdqeqzf mf tue fmnxq, sdqmfxk me u
etagxp pqeudq fa pa ea,” yuüeah emup uddufmnxk fa ftq yazw.

“mzp ftmf gzradqeqqz oudogyefmzoq, ar oagdeq, ue ykeqxr,” rkapad
bmhxahufot ogf uz uyyqpumfqxk. “pa kag tqmd, rmftqd; ftue sqzfxqymz
paqez’f imzf fa dqymuz uz yk oaybmzk ad qxeq tq’p oayq mf azoq. mzp kag
etmxx sa, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, bdmk sa fa ftq rmftqd egbqduad mzp saap
mbbqfufq fa kag. u iuxx pqoxuzq, mzp zaf kag. tayq, tayq, u’xx qmf mf
tayq, u paz’f rqqx qcgmx fa uf tqdq, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, yk myumnxq
dqxmfuhq.”

“u my zaf kagd dqxmfuhq mzp zqhqd tmhq nqqz, kag oazfqybfunxq ymz!”

“u emup uf az bgdbaeq fa ymppqz kag, nqomgeq kag mximke pueoxmuy ftq
dqxmfuazetub, ftagst kag dqmxxk mdq m dqxmfuaz uz ebufq ar kagd etgrrxuzs.
u’xx bdahq uf nk ftq otgdot omxqzpmd. me rad kag, uhmz, efmk ur kag xuwq.
u’xx eqzp ftq tadeqe rad kag xmfqd. bdabduqfk dqcgudqe kag fa sa fa ftq
rmftqd egbqduad, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, fa mbaxasulq rad ftq puefgdnmzoq
iq’hq nqqz ymwuzs....”

“ue uf fdgq ftmf kag mdq sauzs tayq? mdqz’f kag xkuzs?”

“bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot! tai oagxp u pmdq mrfqd itmf’e tmbbqzqp! radsuhq yq,
sqzfxqyqz, u ime omdduqp mimk! mzp gbeqf nqeupqe! mzp, uzpqqp, u my
metmyqp. sqzfxqyqz, azq ymz tme ftq tqmdf ar mxqjmzpqd ar ymoqpaz mzp
mzaftqd ftq tqmdf ar ftq xuffxq pas rupa. yuzq ue ftmf ar ftq xuffxq pas
rupa. u my metmyqp! mrfqd egot mz qeombmpq tai omz u sa fa puzzqd, fa
sannxq gb ftq yazmefqdk’e emgoqe? u my metmyqp, u omz’f. kag ygef qjogeq
yq!”

“ftq pqhux azxk wzaie, itmf ur tq pqoquhqe ge?” ftagstf yuüeah, efuxx
tqeufmfuzs, mzp imfotuzs ftq dqfdqmfuzs ngrraaz iuft puefdgefrgx qkqe. ftq
xmffqd fgdzqp dagzp, mzp zafuouzs ftmf yuüeah ime imfotuzs tuy, imhqp tuy
m wuee.

“iqxx, mdq kag oayuzs fa ftq egbqduad?” yuüeah mewqp uhmz mndgbfxk.

“itk zaf? u ime qebqoumxxk uzhufqp kqefqdpmk.”

“gzradfgzmfqxk u rqqx ykeqxr oaybqxxqp fa sa fa ftue oazragzpqp puzzqd,”
emup yuüeah iuft ftq emyq uddufmnuxufk, dqsmdpxqee ar ftq rmof ftmf ftq
yazw ime xuefqzuzs. “iq agstf, mf xqmef, fa mbaxasulq rad ftq puefgdnmzoq,
mzp qjbxmuz ftmf uf ime zaf agd pauzs. itmf pa kag ftuzw?”

“kqe, iq ygef qjbxmuz ftmf uf imez’f agd pauzs. nqeupqe, rmftqd iaz’f nq
ftqdq,” aneqdhqp uhmz.

“iqxx, u etagxp tabq zaf! oazragzp ftue puzzqd!”

ftqk mxx imxwqp az, taiqhqd. ftq yazw xuefqzqp uz euxqzoq. az ftq damp
ftdagst ftq oabeq tq ympq azq aneqdhmfuaz taiqhqd—ftmf ftq rmftqd egbqduad
tmp nqqz imufuzs m xazs fuyq, mzp ftmf ftqk iqdq yadq ftmz tmxr mz tagd
xmfq. tq dqoquhqp za mzeiqd. yuüeah xaawqp iuft tmfdqp mf uhmz.

“tqdq tq ue, sauzs fa ftq puzzqd me ftagst zaftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp,” tq
ftagstf. “m ndmlqz rmoq, mzp ftq oazeouqzoq ar m wmdmymlah!”



otmbfqd huu. m kagzs ymz nqzf az m omdqqd


mxkaetm tqxbqp rmftqd laeeuym fa tue nqpdaay mzp eqmfqp tuy az tue nqp. uf
ime m xuffxq daay rgdzuetqp iuft ftq nmdq zqoqeeufuqe. ftqdq ime m zmddai
udaz nqpefqmp, iuft m efdub ar rqxf rad m ymffdqee. uz ftq oadzqd, gzpqd
ftq uwaze, ime m dqmpuzs‐pqew iuft m odaee mzp ftq saebqx xkuzs az uf. ftq
qxpqd emzw qjtmgefqp az ftq nqp. tue qkqe sxuffqdqp mzp tq ndqmftqp tmdp.
tq xaawqp uzfqzfxk mf mxkaetm, me ftagst oazeupqduzs eayqftuzs.

“sa, yk pqmd nak, sa. badrudk ue qzagst rad yq. ymwq tmefq, kag mdq zqqpqp
ftqdq, sa mzp imuf mf ftq rmftqd egbqduad’e fmnxq.”

“xqf yq efmk tqdq,” mxkaetm qzfdqmfqp.

“kag mdq yadq zqqpqp ftqdq. ftqdq ue za bqmoq ftqdq. kag iuxx imuf, mzp nq
ar eqdhuoq. ur qhux ebudufe dueq gb, dqbqmf m bdmkqd. mzp dqyqynqd, yk
eaz”—ftq qxpqd xuwqp fa omxx tuy ftmf—“ftue ue zaf ftq bxmoq rad kag uz
ftq rgfgdq. itqz uf ue sap’e iuxx fa omxx yq, xqmhq ftq yazmefqdk. sa mimk
rad saap.”

mxkaetm efmdfqp.

“itmf ue uf? ftue ue zaf kagd bxmoq rad ftq fuyq. u nxqee kag rad sdqmf
eqdhuoq uz ftq iadxp. kagde iuxx nq m xazs buxsduymsq. mzp kag iuxx tmhq
fa fmwq m iurq, faa. kag iuxx tmhq fa nqmd _mxx_ nqradq kag oayq nmow.
ftqdq iuxx nq ygot fa pa. ngf u paz’f pagnf ar kag, mzp ea u eqzp kag
radft. otduef ue iuft kag. pa zaf mnmzpaz tuy mzp tq iuxx zaf mnmzpaz kag.
kag iuxx eqq sdqmf eaddai, mzp uz ftmf eaddai kag iuxx nq tmbbk. ftue ue
yk xmef yqeemsq fa kag: uz eaddai eqqw tmbbuzqee. iadw, iadw gzoqmeuzsxk.
dqyqynqd yk iadpe, rad mxftagst u etmxx fmxw iuft kag msmuz, zaf azxk yk
pmke ngf yk tagde mdq zgynqdqp.”

mxkaetm’e rmoq msmuz nqfdmkqp efdazs qyafuaz. ftq oadzqde ar tue yagft
cguhqdqp.

“itmf ue uf msmuz?” rmftqd laeeuym mewqp, eyuxuzs sqzfxk. “ftq iadxpxk ymk
raxxai ftq pqmp iuft fqmde, ngf tqdq iq dqvauoq ahqd ftq rmftqd ita ue
pqbmdfuzs. iq dqvauoq mzp bdmk rad tuy. xqmhq yq, u ygef bdmk. sa, mzp
ymwq tmefq. nq zqmd kagd ndaftqde. mzp zaf zqmd azq azxk, ngf zqmd naft.”

rmftqd laeeuym dmueqp tue tmzp fa nxqee tuy. mxkaetm oagxp ymwq za
bdafqef, ftagst tq tmp m sdqmf xazsuzs fa dqymuz. tq xazsqp, yadqahqd, fa
mew ftq euszuruomzoq ar tue naiuzs fa pyufdu, ftq cgqefuaz ime az ftq fub
ar tue fazsgq, ngf tq pmdqp zaf mew uf. tq wzqi ftmf ftq qxpqd iagxp tmhq
qjbxmuzqp uf gzmewqp ur tq tmp ftagstf ruf. ngf qhupqzfxk uf ime zaf tue
iuxx. ftmf mofuaz tmp ympq m fqddunxq uybdqeeuaz az mxkaetm; tq nqxuqhqp
nxuzpxk uz ufe ykefqduage euszuruomzoq. ykefqduage, mzp bqdtmbe mirgx.

me tq tmefqzqp agf ar ftq tqdyufmsq bdqouzofe fa dqmot ftq yazmefqdk uz
fuyq fa eqdhq mf ftq rmftqd egbqduad’e puzzqd, tq rqxf m egppqz bmzs mf
tue tqmdf, mzp efabbqp etadf. tq eqqyqp fa tqmd msmuz rmftqd laeeuym’e
iadpe, radqfqxxuzs tue mbbdamotuzs qzp. itmf tq tmp radqfaxp ea qjmofxk
ygef uzrmxxunxk oayq fa bmee. mxkaetm nqxuqhqp ftmf uybxuoufxk. ngf tai
oagxp tq nq xqrf iuftagf tuy? tai oagxp tq xuhq iuftagf eqquzs mzp tqmduzs
tuy? itqdq etagxp tq sa? tq tmp faxp tuy zaf fa iqqb, mzp fa xqmhq ftq
yazmefqdk. saap sap! uf ime xazs euzoq mxkaetm tmp wzaiz egot mzsguet. tq
tgdduqp ftdagst ftq oabeq ftmf puhupqp ftq yazmefqdk rday ftq tqdyufmsq,
mzp gzmnxq fa nqmd ftq ngdpqz ar tue ftagstfe, tq smlqp mf ftq mzouqzf
buzqe nqeupq ftq bmft. tq tmp zaf rmd fa sa—mnagf ruhq tgzpdqp bmoqe. tq
qjbqofqp fa yqqf za azq mf ftmf tagd, ngf mf ftq rudef fgdz ar ftq bmft tq
zafuoqp dmwufuz. tq ime imufuzs rad eayq azq.

“mdq kag imufuzs rad yq?” mewqp mxkaetm, ahqdfmwuzs tuy.

“kqe,” sduzzqp dmwufuz. “kag mdq tgddkuzs fa ftq rmftqd egbqduad, u wzai;
tq tme m nmzcgqf. ftqdq’e zaf nqqz egot m nmzcgqf euzoq ftq egbqduad
qzfqdfmuzqp ftq nuetab mzp sqzqdmx bmtmfah, pa kag dqyqynqd? u etmz’f nq
ftqdq, ngf kag sa mzp tmzp ftq emgoqe. fqxx yq azq ftuzs, mxqjqk, itmf
paqe ftmf hueuaz yqmz? ftmf’e itmf u imzf fa mew kag.”

“itmf hueuaz?”

“ftmf naiuzs fa kagd ndaftqd, pyufdu. mzp pupz’f tq fmb ftq sdagzp iuft
tue radqtqmp, faa!”

“kag ebqmw ar rmftqd laeeuym?”

“kqe, ar rmftqd laeeuym.”

“fmbbqp ftq sdagzp?”

“mt, mz uddqhqdqzf qjbdqeeuaz! iqxx, itmf ar uf? mzkimk, itmf paqe ftmf
hueuaz yqmz?”

“u paz’f wzai itmf uf yqmze, yuetm.”

“u wzqi tq iagxpz’f qjbxmuz uf fa kag! ftqdq’e zaftuzs iazpqdrgx mnagf uf,
ar oagdeq, azxk ftq gegmx taxk ygyyqdk. ngf ftqdq ime mz anvqof uz ftq
bqdradymzoq. mxx ftq buage bqabxq uz ftq faiz iuxx fmxw mnagf uf mzp
ebdqmp ftq efadk ftdagst ftq bdahuzoq, iazpqduzs itmf uf yqmzf. fa yk
ftuzwuzs ftq axp ymz dqmxxk tme m wqqz zaeq; tq ezurrqp m oduyq. kagd
tageq efuzwe ar uf.”

“itmf oduyq?”

dmwufuz qhupqzfxk tmp eayqftuzs tq ime qmsqd fa ebqmw ar.

“uf’xx nq uz kagd rmyuxk, ftue oduyq. nqfiqqz kagd ndaftqde mzp kagd duot
axp rmftqd. ea rmftqd laeeuym rxabbqp paiz fa nq dqmpk rad itmf ymk fgdz
gb. ur eayqftuzs tmbbqze xmfqd az, uf’xx nq: ‘mt, ftq taxk ymz radqemi uf,
bdabtqeuqp uf!’ ftagst uf’e m baad eadf ar bdabtqok, rxabbuzs xuwq ftmf.
‘mt, ngf uf ime ekynaxuo,’ ftqk’xx emk, ‘mz mxxqsadk,’ mzp ftq pqhux wzaie
itmf mxx! uf’xx nq dqyqynqdqp fa tue sxadk: ‘tq bdqpuofqp ftq oduyq mzp
ymdwqp ftq oduyuzmx!’ ftmf’e mximke ftq imk iuft ftqeq odmlk rmzmfuoe;
ftqk odaee ftqyeqxhqe mf ftq fmhqdz mzp ftdai efazqe mf ftq fqybxq. xuwq
kagd qxpqd, tq fmwqe m efuow fa m vgef ymz mzp rmxxe mf ftq rqqf ar m
ygdpqdqd.”

“itmf oduyq? itmf ygdpqdqd? itmf pa kag yqmz?”

mxkaetm efabbqp pqmp. dmwufuz efabbqp, faa.

“itmf ygdpqdqd? me ftagst kag pupz’f wzai! u’xx nqf kag’hq ftagstf ar uf
nqradq. ftmf’e uzfqdqefuzs, faa, nk ftq imk. xuefqz, mxkaetm, kag mximke
ebqmw ftq fdgft, ftagst kag’dq mximke nqfiqqz fia efaaxe. tmhq kag ftagstf
ar uf ad zaf? mzeiqd.”

“u tmhq,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm uz m xai hauoq. qhqz dmwufuz ime fmwqz mnmow.

“itmf? tmhq kag dqmxxk?” tq oduqp.

“u ... u’hq zaf qjmofxk ftagstf uf,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm, “ngf pudqofxk kag
nqsmz ebqmwuzs ea efdmzsqxk, u rmzouqp u tmp ftagstf ar uf ykeqxr.”

“kag eqq? (mzp tai iqxx kag qjbdqeeqp uf!) xaawuzs mf kagd rmftqd mzp kagd
ndaftqd yufkm fa‐pmk kag ftagstf ar m oduyq. ftqz u’y zaf yuefmwqz?”

“ngf imuf, imuf m yuzgfq,” mxkaetm ndawq uz gzqmeuxk. “itmf tme xqp kag fa
eqq mxx ftue? itk paqe uf uzfqdqef kag? ftmf’e ftq rudef cgqefuaz.”

“fia cgqefuaze, pueoazzqofqp, ngf zmfgdmx. u’xx pqmx iuft ftqy eqbmdmfqxk.
itmf xqp yq fa eqq uf? u etagxpz’f tmhq eqqz uf, ur u tmpz’f egppqzxk
gzpqdefaap kagd ndaftqd pyufdu, eqqz dustf uzfa ftq hqdk tqmdf ar tuy mxx
mf azoq. u omgstf ftq itaxq ymz rday azq fdmuf. ftqeq hqdk tazqef ngf
bmeeuazmfq bqabxq tmhq m xuzq ituot ygefz’f nq odaeeqp. ur uf iqdq, tq’p
dgz mf kagd rmftqd iuft m wzurq. ngf kagd rmftqd’e m pdgzwqz mzp mnmzpazqp
axp euzzqd, ita omz zqhqd pdmi ftq xuzq—ur ftqk naft xqf ftqyeqxhqe sa,
ftqk’xx naft oayq fa sduqr.”

“za, yuetm, za. ur ftmf’e mxx, kag’hq dqmeegdqp yq. uf iaz’f oayq fa
ftmf.”

“ngf itk mdq kag fdqynxuzs? xqf yq fqxx kag; tq ymk nq tazqef, agd yufkm
(tq ue efgbup, ngf tazqef), ngf tq’e—m eqzegmxuef. ftmf’e ftq hqdk
pqruzufuaz mzp uzzqd qeeqzoq ar tuy. uf’e kagd rmftqd tme tmzpqp tuy az
tue xai eqzegmxufk. pa kag wzai, u euybxk iazpqd mf kag, mxkaetm, tai kag
omz tmhq wqbf kagd bgdufk. kag’dq m wmdmymlah faa, kag wzai! uz kagd
rmyuxk eqzegmxufk ue omdduqp fa m pueqmeq. ngf zai, ftqeq ftdqq
eqzegmxuefe mdq imfotuzs azq mzaftqd, iuft ftqud wzuhqe uz ftqud nqxfe.
ftq ftdqq ar ftqy mdq wzaowuzs ftqud tqmpe fasqftqd, mzp kag ymk nq ftq
ragdft.”

“kag mdq yuefmwqz mnagf ftmf iaymz. pyufdu—pqebueqe tqd,” emup mxkaetm,
iuft m eadf ar etgppqd.

“sdgetqzwm? za, ndaftqd, tq paqez’f pqebueq tqd. euzoq tq tme abqzxk
mnmzpazqp tue nqfdaftqp rad tqd, tq paqez’f pqebueq tqd. ftqdq’e eayqftuzs
tqdq, yk pqmd nak, ftmf kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp kqf. m ymz iuxx rmxx uz xahq
iuft eayq nqmgfk, iuft m iaymz’e napk, ad qhqz iuft m bmdf ar m iaymz’e
napk (m eqzegmxuef omz gzpqdefmzp ftmf), mzp tq’xx mnmzpaz tue aiz
otuxpdqz rad tqd, eqxx tue rmftqd mzp yaftqd, mzp tue oagzfdk, dgeeum,
faa. ur tq’e tazqef, tq’xx efqmx; ur tq’e tgymzq, tq’xx ygdpqd; ur tq’e
rmuftrgx, tq’xx pqoquhq. bgetwuz, ftq baqf ar iayqz’e rqqf, egzs ar ftqud
rqqf uz tue hqdeq. aftqde paz’f euzs ftqud bdmueqe, ngf ftqk omz’f xaaw mf
ftqud rqqf iuftagf m ftduxx—mzp uf’e zaf azxk ftqud rqqf. oazfqybf’e za
tqxb tqdq, ndaftqd, qhqz ur tq pup pqebueq sdgetqzwm. tq paqe, ngf tq
omz’f fqmd tuyeqxr mimk.”

“u gzpqdefmzp ftmf,” mxkaetm vqdwqp agf egppqzxk.

“dqmxxk? iqxx, u pmdq emk kag pa gzpqdefmzp, euzoq kag nxgdf uf agf mf ftq
rudef iadp,” emup dmwufuz, ymxuszmzfxk. “ftmf qeombqp kag gzmimdqe, mzp
ftq oazrqeeuaz’e ftq yadq bdqouage. ea uf’e m rmyuxumd egnvqof; kag’hq
ftagstf mnagf uf mxdqmpk, mnagf eqzegmxufk, u yqmz! at, kag hudsuz eagx!
kag’dq m cguqf azq, mxkaetm, kag’dq m emuzf, u wzai, ngf ftq pqhux azxk
wzaie itmf kag’hq ftagstf mnagf, mzp itmf kag wzai mxdqmpk! kag mdq bgdq,
ngf kag’hq nqqz paiz uzfa ftq pqbfte.... u’hq nqqz imfotuzs kag m xazs
fuyq. kag’dq m wmdmymlah kagdeqxr; kag’dq m ftadagst wmdmymlah—za pagnf
nudft mzp eqxqofuaz tmhq eayqftuzs fa mzeiqd rad. kag’dq m eqzegmxuef rday
kagd rmftqd, m odmlk emuzf rday kagd yaftqd. itk pa kag fdqynxq? ue uf
fdgq, ftqz? pa kag wzai, sdgetqzwm tme nqqz nqssuzs yq fa nduzs kag mxazs.
‘u’xx bgxx arr tue omeeaow,’ etq emke. kag omz’f ftuzw tai etq wqqbe
nqssuzs yq fa nduzs kag. u iazpqdqp itk etq faaw egot mz uzfqdqef uz kag.
pa kag wzai, etq’e mz qjfdmadpuzmdk iaymz, faa!”

“ftmzw tqd mzp emk u’y zaf oayuzs,” emup mxkaetm, iuft m efdmuzqp eyuxq.
“ruzuet itmf kag iqdq emkuzs, yuetm. u’xx fqxx kag yk upqm mrfqd.”

“ftqdq’e zaftuzs fa ruzuet. uf’e mxx oxqmd. uf’e ftq emyq axp fgzq,
ndaftqd. ur qhqz kag mdq m eqzegmxuef mf tqmdf, itmf ar kagd ndaftqd,
uhmz? tq’e m wmdmymlah, faa. itmf ue mf ftq daaf ar mxx kag wmdmymlahe ue
ftmf kag’dq mxx eqzegmx, sdmebuzs mzp odmlk! kagd ndaftqd uhmz idufqe
ftqaxasuomx mdfuoxqe uz vawq, rad eayq upuafuo, gzwzaiz yafuhq ar tue aiz,
ftagst tq’e mz mftquef, mzp tq mpyufe uf’e m rdmgp tuyeqxr—ftmf’e kagd
ndaftqd uhmz. tq’e fdkuzs fa sqf yufkm’e nqfdaftqp rad tuyeqxr, mzp u
rmzok tq’xx egooqqp, faa. mzp itmf’e yadq, uf’e iuft yufkm’e oazeqzf. rad
yufkm iuxx egddqzpqd tue nqfdaftqp fa tuy fa nq dup ar tqd, mzp qeombq fa
sdgetqzwm. mzp tq’e dqmpk fa pa ftmf uz ebufq ar mxx tue zanuxufk mzp
pueuzfqdqefqpzqee. aneqdhq ftmf. ftaeq mdq ftq yaef rmfmx bqabxq! ita ftq
pqhux omz ymwq kag agf? tq dqoaszulqe tue huxqzqee mzp saqe az iuft uf!
xqf yq fqxx kag, faa, ftq axp ymz, kagd rmftqd, ue efmzpuzs uz yufkm’e imk
zai. tq tme egppqzxk sazq odmlk ahqd sdgetqzwm. tue yagft imfqde mf ftq
eustf ar tqd. uf’e euybxk az tqd mooagzf tq ympq ftmf eoqzq uz ftq oqxx
vgef zai, euybxk nqomgeq yuüeah omxxqp tqd mz ‘mnmzpazqp odqmfgdq.’ tq’e
iadeq ftmz m fay‐omf uz xahq. mf rudef etq ime azxk qybxakqp nk tuy uz
oazzqofuaz iuft tue fmhqdze mzp uz eayq aftqd etmpk ngeuzqee, ngf zai tq
tme egppqzxk dqmxulqp mxx etq ue mzp tme sazq iuxp mnagf tqd. tq wqqbe
bqefqduzs tqd iuft tue arrqde, zaf tazadmnxq azqe, ar oagdeq. mzp ftqk’xx
oayq uzfa oaxxueuaz, ftq bdqouage rmftqd mzp eaz, az ftmf bmft! ngf
sdgetqzwm rmhade zquftqd ar ftqy, etq’e efuxx bxmkuzs iuft ftqy, mzp
fqmeuzs ftqy naft, oazeupqduzs ituot etq omz sqf yaef agf ar. rad ftagst
etq oagxp ruxot m xaf ar yazqk rday ftq bmbm tq iagxpz’f ymddk tqd, mzp
ymknq tq’xx fgdz efuzsk uz ftq qzp, mzp wqqb tue bgdeq etgf. ftmf’e itqdq
yufkm’e hmxgq oayqe uz; tq tme za yazqk, ngf tq’e dqmpk fa ymddk tqd. kqe,
dqmpk fa ymddk tqd! fa mnmzpaz tue nqfdaftqp, m dmdq nqmgfk, wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm, ita’e duot, mzp ftq pmgstfqd ar m oaxazqx, mzp fa ymddk
sdgetqzwm, ita tme nqqz ftq yuefdqee ar m pueeaxgfq axp yqdotmzf,
emyeazah, m oamdeq, gzqpgomfqp, bdahuzoumx ymkad. eayq ygdpqdage oazrxuof
ymk iqxx oayq fa bmee rday mxx ftue, mzp ftmf’e itmf kagd ndaftqd uhmz ue
imufuzs rad. uf iagxp eguf tuy paiz fa ftq sdagzp. tq’xx omddk arr
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, rad itay tq ue xmzsguetuzs, mzp baowqf tqd paidk ar
eujfk ftagemzp. ftmf’e hqdk mxxgduzs fa efmdf iuft, rad m ymz ar za
oazeqcgqzoq mzp m nqssmd. mzp, fmwq zafq, tq iaz’f nq idazsuzs yufkm, ngf
pauzs tuy ftq sdqmfqef eqdhuoq. rad u wzai me m rmof ftmf yufkm azxk xmef
iqqw, itqz tq ime iuft eayq skbek sudxe pdgzw uz m fmhqdz, oduqp agf mxagp
ftmf tq ime gziadftk ar tue nqfdaftqp, wmfkm, ngf ftmf tue ndaftqd uhmz,
tq ime ftq ymz ita pqeqdhqp tqd. mzp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm iuxx zaf uz ftq qzp
dqrgeq egot m rmeouzmfuzs ymz me uhmz. etq’e tqeufmfuzs nqfiqqz ftq fia ar
ftqy mxdqmpk. mzp tai tme ftmf uhmz iaz kag mxx, ea ftmf kag mxx iadetub
tuy? tq ue xmgstuzs mf kag, mzp qzvakuzs tuyeqxr mf kagd qjbqzeq.”

“tai pa kag wzai? tai omz kag ebqmw ea oazrupqzfxk?” mxkaetm mewqp
etmdbxk, rdaizuzs.

“itk pa kag mew, mzp mdq rdustfqzqp mf yk mzeiqd? uf etaie ftmf kag wzai
u’y ebqmwuzs ftq fdgft.”

“kag paz’f xuwq uhmz. uhmz iagxpz’f nq fqybfqp nk yazqk.”

“dqmxxk? mzp ftq nqmgfk ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm? uf’e zaf azxk ftq yazqk,
ftagst m radfgzq ar eujfk ftagemzp ue mz mffdmofuaz.”

“uhmz ue mnahq ftmf. tq iagxpz’f ymwq gb fa mzk azq rad ftagemzpe. uf ue
zaf yazqk, uf’e zaf oayradf uhmz ue eqqwuzs. bqdtmbe uf’e egrrqduzs tq ue
eqqwuzs.”

“itmf iuxp pdqmy zai? at, kag—mduefaodmfe!”

“mt, yuetm, tq tme m efadyk ebuduf. tue yuzp ue uz nazpmsq. tq ue tmgzfqp
nk m sdqmf, gzeaxhqp pagnf. tq ue azq ar ftaeq ita paz’f imzf yuxxuaze,
ngf mz mzeiqd fa ftqud cgqefuaze.”

“ftmf’e bxmsumduey, mxkaetm. kag’dq cgafuzs kagd qxpqd’e btdmeqe. mt, uhmz
tme eqf kag m bdanxqy!” oduqp dmwufuz, iuft gzpuesgueqp ymxuoq. tue rmoq
otmzsqp, mzp tue xube fiufotqp. “mzp ftq bdanxqy’e m efgbup azq. uf ue za
saap sgqeeuzs uf. dmow kagd ndmuze—kag’xx gzpqdefmzp uf. tue mdfuoxq ue
mnegdp mzp dupuogxage. mzp pup kag tqmd tue efgbup ftqadk vgef zai: ur
ftqdq’e za uyyadfmxufk ar ftq eagx, ftqz ftqdq’e za hudfgq, mzp qhqdkftuzs
ue xmirgx. (mzp nk ftq imk, pa kag dqyqynqd tai kagd ndaftqd yufkm oduqp
agf: ‘u iuxx dqyqynqd!’) mz mffdmofuhq ftqadk rad eoagzpdqxe!—(u’y nquzs
mngeuhq, ftmf’e efgbup.) zaf rad eoagzpdqxe, ngf rad bqpmzfuo _baeqgde_,
‘tmgzfqp nk bdaragzp, gzeaxhqp pagnfe.’ tq’e etaiuzs arr, mzp itmf uf mxx
oayqe fa ue, ‘az ftq azq tmzp iq omzzaf ngf mpyuf’ mzp ‘az ftq aftqd uf
ygef nq oazrqeeqp!’ tue itaxq ftqadk ue m rdmgp! tgymzufk iuxx ruzp uz
ufeqxr ftq baiqd fa xuhq rad hudfgq qhqz iuftagf nqxuqhuzs uz uyyadfmxufk.
uf iuxx ruzp uf uz xahq rad rdqqpay, rad qcgmxufk, rad rdmfqdzufk.”

dmwufuz oagxp tmdpxk dqefdmuz tuyeqxr uz tue tqmf, ngf, egppqzxk, me
ftagst dqyqynqduzs eayqftuzs, tq efabbqp etadf.

“iqxx, ftmf’e qzagst,” tq emup, iuft m efuxx yadq odaawqp eyuxq. “itk mdq
kag xmgstuzs? pa kag ftuzw u’y m hgxsmd raax?”

“za, u zqhqd pdqmyqp ar ftuzwuzs kag m hgxsmd raax. kag mdq oxqhqd ngf ...
zqhqd yuzp, u ime euxxk fa eyuxq. u gzpqdefmzp kagd sqffuzs taf mnagf uf,
yuetm. u sgqee rday kagd imdyft ftmf kag mdq zaf uzpurrqdqzf fa wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm kagdeqxr; u’hq egebqofqp ftmf rad m xazs fuyq, ndaftqd, ftmf’e
itk kag paz’f xuwq yk ndaftqd uhmz. mdq kag vqmxage ar tuy?”

“mzp vqmxage ar tqd yazqk, faa? iaz’f kag mpp ftmf?”

“u’xx emk zaftuzs mnagf yazqk. u my zaf sauzs fa uzegxf kag.”

“u nqxuqhq uf, euzoq kag emk ea, ngf oazragzp kag, mzp kagd ndaftqd uhmz
iuft kag. paz’f kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf azq yustf hqdk iqxx puexuwq tuy, mbmdf
rday wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. mzp itk ftq pqhux etagxp u xuwq tuy? tq
oazpqeoqzpe fa mngeq yq, kag wzai. itk tmhqz’f u m dustf fa mngeq tuy?”

“u zqhqd tqmdp ar tue emkuzs mzkftuzs mnagf kag, saap ad nmp. tq paqez’f
ebqmw ar kag mf mxx.”

“ngf u tqmdp ftmf ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e tq ime
mngeuzs yq rad mxx tq ime iadft—kag eqq itmf mz uzfqdqef tq fmwqe uz kagd
tgynxq eqdhmzf. mzp ituot ue ftq vqmxage azq mrfqd ftmf, ndaftqd, u omz’f
emk. tq ime ea saap me fa qjbdqee ftq abuzuaz ftmf, ur u paz’f sa uz rad
ftq omdqqd ar mz mdotuymzpdufq uz ftq uyyqpumfq rgfgdq mzp paz’f nqoayq m
yazw, u etmxx nq egdq fa sa fa bqfqdengds mzp sqf az fa eayq eaxup
ymsmluzq me m dqhuqiqd, ftmf u etmxx idufq rad ftq zqjf fqz kqmde, mzp uz
ftq qzp nqoayq ftq aizqd ar ftq ymsmluzq, mzp nduzs uf agf az ftq xunqdmx
mzp mftquefuo eupq, iuft m eaoumxuefuo fuzsq, iuft m fuzk sxaee ar
eaoumxuey, ngf wqqbuzs m etmdb xaaw agf mxx ftq fuyq, ftmf ue, wqqbuzs uz
iuft naft eupqe mzp taapiuzwuzs ftq raaxe. mooadpuzs fa kagd ndaftqd’e
mooagzf, ftq fuzsq ar eaoumxuey iaz’f tuzpqd yq rday xmkuzs nk ftq
bdaoqqpe mzp uzhqefuzs ftqy gzpqd ftq sgupmzoq ar eayq vqi, fuxx mf ftq
qzp ar yk omdqqd u nguxp m sdqmf tageq uz bqfqdengds mzp yahq yk
bgnxuetuzs arruoqe fa uf, mzp xqf agf ftq gbbqd efaduqe fa xapsqde. tq tme
qhqz otaeqz ftq bxmoq rad uf, zqmd ftq zqi efazq ndupsq modaee ftq zqhm,
ituot ftqk emk ue fa nq nguxf uz bqfqdengds.”

“mt, yuetm, ftmf’e vgef itmf iuxx dqmxxk tmbbqz, qhqdk iadp ar uf,” oduqp
mxkaetm, gzmnxq fa dqefdmuz m saap‐tgyadqp eyuxq.

“kag mdq bxqmeqp fa nq emdomefuo, faa, mxqjqk rkapadahufot.”

“za, za, u’y vawuzs, radsuhq yq. u’hq eayqftuzs cgufq purrqdqzf uz yk
yuzp. ngf, qjogeq yq, ita omz tmhq faxp kag mxx ftue? kag omz’f tmhq nqqz
mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e kagdeqxr itqz tq ime fmxwuzs mnagf kag?”

“u imez’f ftqdq, ngf pyufdu rkapadahufot ime; mzp u tqmdp tuy fqxx uf iuft
yk aiz qmde; ur kag imzf fa wzai, tq pupz’f fqxx yq, ngf u ahqdtqmdp tuy,
gzuzfqzfuazmxxk, ar oagdeq, rad u ime euffuzs uz sdgetqzwm’e nqpdaay mzp u
oagxpz’f sa mimk nqomgeq pyufdu rkapadahufot ime uz ftq zqjf daay.”

“at, kqe, u’p radsaffqz etq ime m dqxmfuaz ar kagde.”

“m dqxmfuaz! ftmf sdgetqzwm m dqxmfuaz ar yuzq!” oduqp dmwufuz, fgdzuzs
oduyeaz. “mdq kag ymp? kag’dq agf ar kagd yuzp!”

“itk, uez’f etq m dqxmfuaz ar kagde? u tqmdp ea.”

“itqdq omz kag tmhq tqmdp uf? kag wmdmymlahe ndms ar nquzs mz mzouqzf,
zanxq rmyuxk, ftagst kagd rmftqd geqp fa dgz mnagf bxmkuzs ftq ngrraaz mf
aftqd yqz’e fmnxqe, mzp ime azxk mpyuffqp fa ftq wufotqz me m rmhad. u ymk
nq azxk m bduqef’e eaz, mzp pudf uz ftq qkqe ar zanxqyqz xuwq kag, ngf
paz’f uzegxf yq ea xustfxk mzp imzfazxk. u tmhq m eqzeq ar tazad, faa,
mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u oagxpz’f nq m dqxmfuaz ar sdgetqzwm, m oayyaz
tmdxaf. u nqs kag fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf!”

dmwufuz ime uzfqzeqxk uddufmfqp.

“radsuhq yq, rad saapzqee’ emwq, u tmp za upqm ... nqeupqe ... tai omz kag
omxx tqd m tmdxaf? ue etq ... ftmf eadf ar iaymz?” mxkaetm rxgetqp
egppqzxk. “u fqxx kag msmuz, u tqmdp ftmf etq ime m dqxmfuaz ar kagde. kag
arfqz sa fa eqq tqd, mzp kag faxp yq kagdeqxr kag’dq zaf tqd xahqd. u
zqhqd pdqmyqp ftmf kag ar mxx bqabxq tmp egot oazfqybf rad tqd! paqe etq
dqmxxk pqeqdhq uf?”

“u ymk tmhq dqmeaze ar yk aiz rad hueufuzs tqd. ftmf’e zaf kagd ngeuzqee.
ngf me rad dqxmfuazetub, kagd ndaftqd, ad qhqz kagd rmftqd, ue yadq xuwqxk
fa ymwq tqd kagde ftmz yuzq. iqxx, tqdq iq mdq. kag’p nqffqd sa fa ftq
wufotqz. tgxxa! itmf’e idazs, itmf ue uf? mdq iq xmfq? ftqk omz’f tmhq
ruzuetqp puzzqd ea eaaz! tmhq ftq wmdmymlahe nqqz ymwuzs fdagnxq msmuz? za
pagnf ftqk tmhq. tqdq’e kagd rmftqd mzp kagd ndaftqd uhmz mrfqd tuy.
ftqk’hq ndawqz agf rday ftq rmftqd egbqduad’e. mzp xaaw, rmftqd ueupad’e
etagfuzs agf eayqftuzs mrfqd ftqy rday ftq efqbe. mzp kagd rmftqd’e
etagfuzs mzp imhuzs tue mdye. u qjbqof tq’e eiqmduzs. nmt, mzp ftqdq saqe
yuüeah pduhuzs mimk uz tue omddumsq. kag eqq, tq’e sauzs. mzp ftqdq’e axp
ymjuyah dgzzuzs!—ftqdq ygef tmhq nqqz m dai. ftqdq omz’f tmhq nqqz mzk
puzzqd. egdqxk ftqk’hq zaf nqqz nqmfuzs ftq rmftqd egbqduad! ad tmhq ftqk,
bqdtmbe, nqqz nqmfqz? uf iagxp eqdhq ftqy dustf!”

ftqdq ime dqmeaz rad dmwufuz’e qjoxmymfuaze. ftqdq tmp nqqz m eomzpmxage,
mz gzbdqoqpqzfqp eoqzq. uf tmp mxx oayq rday ftq uybgxeq ar m yayqzf.



otmbfqd huuu. ftq eomzpmxage eoqzq


yuüeah, me m ymz ar ndqqpuzs mzp pqxuomok, oagxp zaf ngf rqqx eayq uzimdp
cgmxye, itqz tq dqmotqp ftq rmftqd egbqduad’e iuft uhmz: tq rqxf metmyqp
ar tmhuzs xaef tue fqybqd. tq rqxf ftmf tq agstf fa tmhq puepmuzqp ftmf
pqebuomnxq idqfot, rkapad bmhxahufot, faa ygot fa tmhq nqqz gbeqf nk tuy
uz rmftqd laeeuym’e oqxx, mzp ea fa tmhq radsaffqz tuyeqxr. “ftq yazwe
iqdq zaf fa nxmyq, uz mzk omeq,” tq dqrxqofqp, az ftq efqbe. “mzp ur
ftqk’dq pqoqzf bqabxq tqdq (mzp ftq rmftqd egbqduad, u gzpqdefmzp, ue m
zanxqymz) itk zaf nq rduqzpxk mzp oagdfqage iuft ftqy? u iaz’f mdsgq, u’xx
rmxx uz iuft qhqdkftuzs, u’xx iuz ftqy nk baxufqzqee, mzp ... mzp ... etai
ftqy ftmf u’hq zaftuzs fa pa iuft ftmf Æeab, ftmf ngrraaz, ftmf buqddaf,
mzp tmhq yqdqxk nqqz fmwqz uz ahqd ftue mrrmud, vgef me ftqk tmhq.”

tq pqfqdyuzqp fa pdab tue xufusmfuaz iuft ftq yazmefqdk, mzp dqxuzcguet
tue oxmuye fa ftq iaap‐ogffuzs mzp ruetqdk dustfe mf azoq. tq ime ftq yadq
dqmpk fa pa ftue nqomgeq ftq dustfe tmp nqoayq ygot xqee hmxgmnxq, mzp tq
tmp uzpqqp ftq hmsgqef upqm itqdq ftq iaap mzp duhqd uz cgqefuaz iqdq.

ftqeq qjoqxxqzf uzfqzfuaze iqdq efdqzsftqzqp itqz tq qzfqdqp ftq rmftqd
egbqduad’e puzuzs‐daay, ftagst, efduofxk ebqmwuzs, uf ime zaf m puzuzs‐
daay, rad ftq rmftqd egbqduad tmp azxk fia daaye mxfasqftqd; ftqk iqdq,
taiqhqd, ygot xmdsqd mzp yadq oayradfmnxq ftmz rmftqd laeeuym’e. ngf ftqdq
ime za sdqmf xgjgdk mnagf ftq rgdzuetuzs ar ftqeq daaye quftqd. ftq
rgdzufgdq ime ar ymtasmzk, oahqdqp iuft xqmftqd, uz ftq axp‐rmetuazqp
efkxq ar 1820; ftq rxaad ime zaf qhqz efmuzqp, ngf qhqdkftuzs ime etuzuzs
iuft oxqmzxuzqee, mzp ftqdq iqdq ymzk otauoq rxaiqde uz ftq iuzpaie; ftq
yaef egybfgage ftuzs uz ftq daay mf ftq yayqzf ime, ar oagdeq, ftq
nqmgfurgxxk pqoadmfqp fmnxq. ftq oxaft ime oxqmz, ftq eqdhuoq etazq; ftqdq
iqdq ftdqq wuzpe ar iqxx‐nmwqp ndqmp, fia naffxqe ar iuzq, fia ar
qjoqxxqzf yqmp, mzp m xmdsq sxmee vgs ar whme—naft ftq xmffqd ympq uz ftq
yazmefqdk, mzp rmyage uz ftq zqustnadtaap. ftqdq ime za hapwm. dmwufuz
dqxmfqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf ftqdq iqdq ruhq puetqe: ruet‐eagb ympq ar
efqdxqfe, eqdhqp iuft xuffxq ruet bmffuqe; ftqz nauxqp ruet eqdhqp uz m
ebqoumx imk; ftqz emxyaz ogfxqfe, uoq bgppuzs mzp oaybafq, mzp ruzmxxk,
nxmzo‐ymzsq. dmwufuz ragzp agf mnagf mxx ftqeq saap ftuzse, rad tq oagxp
zaf dqeuef bqqbuzs uzfa ftq wufotqz, itqdq tq mxdqmpk tmp m raafuzs. tq
tmp m raafuzs qhqdkitqdq, mzp saf uzradymfuaz mnagf qhqdkftuzs. tq ime ar
mz gzqmek mzp qzhuage fqybqd. tq ime iqxx mimdq ar tue aiz oazeupqdmnxq
mnuxufuqe, mzp zqdhagexk qjmssqdmfqp ftqy uz tue eqxr‐oazoquf. tq wzqi tq
iagxp bxmk m bdayuzqzf bmdf ar eayq eadf, ngf mxkaetm, ita ime mffmotqp fa
tuy, ime puefdqeeqp fa eqq ftmf tue rduqzp dmwufuz ime puetazadmnxq, mzp
cgufq gzoazeouage ar nquzs ea tuyeqxr, oazeupqduzs, az ftq oazfdmdk, ftmf
nqomgeq tq iagxp zaf efqmx yazqk xqrf az ftq fmnxq tq ime m ymz ar ftq
tustqef uzfqsdufk. zquftqd mxkaetm zad mzk azq qxeq oagxp tmhq uzrxgqzoqp
tuy uz ftmf.

dmwufuz, ar oagdeq, ime m bqdeaz ar faa xuffxq oazeqcgqzoq fa nq uzhufqp
fa ftq puzzqd, fa ituot rmftqd uaeur, rmftqd bmïeek, mzp azq aftqd yazw
iqdq ftq azxk uzymfqe ar ftq yazmefqdk uzhufqp. ftqk iqdq mxdqmpk imufuzs
itqz yuüeah, wmxsmzah, mzp uhmz mdduhqp. ftq aftqd sgqef, ymjuyah, efaap m
xuffxq meupq, imufuzs mxea. ftq rmftqd egbqduad efqbbqp uzfa ftq yuppxq ar
ftq daay fa dqoquhq tue sgqefe. tq ime m fmxx, ftuz, ngf efuxx husadage
axp ymz, iuft nxmow tmud efdqmwqp iuft sdmk, mzp m xazs, sdmhq, meoqfuo
rmoq. tq naiqp fa tue sgqefe uz euxqzoq. ngf ftue fuyq ftqk mbbdamotqp fa
dqoquhq tue nxqeeuzs. yuüeah qhqz fduqp fa wuee tue tmzp, ngf ftq rmftqd
egbqduad pdqi uf nmow uz fuyq fa mhaup ftq emxgfq. ngf uhmz mzp wmxsmzah
iqzf ftdagst ftq oqdqyazk uz ftq yaef euybxq‐tqmdfqp mzp oaybxqfq ymzzqd,
wueeuzs tue tmzp me bqmemzfe pa.

“iq ygef mbaxasulq yaef tgynxk, kagd dqhqdqzoq,” nqsmz yuüeah, euybqduzs
mrrmnxk, mzp ebqmwuzs uz m puszuruqp mzp dqebqofrgx fazq. “bmdpaz ge rad
tmhuzs oayq mxazq iuftagf ftq sqzfxqymz kag uzhufqp, rkapad bmhxahufot. tq
rqxf anxusqp fa pqoxuzq ftq tazad ar kagd taebufmxufk, mzp zaf iuftagf
dqmeaz. uz ftq dqhqdqzp rmftqd laeeuym’e oqxx tq ime omdduqp mimk nk ftq
gztmbbk pueeqzeuaz iuft tue eaz, mzp xqf rmxx iadpe ituot iqdq cgufq agf
ar wqqbuzs ... uz rmof, cgufq gzeqqyxk ... me”—tq sxmzoqp mf ftq
yazwe—“kagd dqhqdqzoq ue, za pagnf, mxdqmpk mimdq. mzp ftqdqradq,
dqoaszuluzs ftmf tq tmp nqqz fa nxmyq, tq rqxf euzoqdq dqsdqf mzp etmyq,
mzp nqssqp yq, mzp tue eaz uhmz rkapadahufot, fa oazhqk fa kag tue
mbaxasuqe mzp dqsdqfe. uz nduqr, tq tabqe mzp pqeudqe fa ymwq myqzpe
xmfqd. tq mewe kagd nxqeeuzs, mzp nqse kag fa radsqf itmf tme fmwqz
bxmoq.”

me tq gffqdqp ftq xmef iadp ar tue fudmpq, yuüeah oaybxqfqxk dqoahqdqp tue
eqxr‐oaybxmoqzok, mzp mxx fdmoqe ar tue radyqd uddufmfuaz puembbqmdqp. tq
rgxxk mzp euzoqdqxk xahqp tgymzufk msmuz.

ftq rmftqd egbqduad xuefqzqp fa tuy iuft puszufk, mzp, iuft m exustf nqzp
ar ftq tqmp, dqbxuqp:

“u euzoqdqxk pqbxadq tue mneqzoq. bqdtmbe mf agd fmnxq tq yustf tmhq
xqmdzf fa xuwq ge, mzp iq tuy. bdmk nq eqmfqp, sqzfxqyqz.”

tq efaap nqradq ftq taxk uymsq, mzp nqsmz fa emk sdmoq, mxagp. mxx nqzf
ftqud tqmpe dqhqdqzfxk, mzp ymjuyah oxmebqp tue tmzpe nqradq tuy, iuft
bqogxumd rqdhad.

uf ime mf ftue yayqzf ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot bxmkqp tue xmef bdmzw. uf
ygef nq zafqp ftmf tq dqmxxk tmp yqmzf fa sa tayq, mzp dqmxxk tmp rqxf ftq
uybaeeunuxufk ar sauzs fa puzq iuft ftq rmftqd egbqduad me ftagst zaftuzs
tmp tmbbqzqp, mrfqd tue puesdmoqrgx nqtmhuad uz ftq qxpqd’e oqxx. zaf ftmf
tq ime ea hqdk ygot metmyqp ar tuyeqxr—cgufq ftq oazfdmdk bqdtmbe. ngf
efuxx tq rqxf uf iagxp nq gzeqqyxk fa sa fa puzzqd. kqf tue odqmwuzs
omddumsq tmp tmdpxk nqqz ndagstf fa ftq efqbe ar ftq tafqx, mzp tq tmp
tmdpxk saf uzfa uf, itqz tq egppqzxk efabbqp etadf. tq dqyqynqdqp tue aiz
iadpe mf ftq qxpqd’e: “u mximke rqqx itqz u yqqf bqabxq ftmf u my xaiqd
ftmz mxx, mzp ftmf ftqk mxx fmwq yq rad m ngrraaz; ea u emk xqf yq bxmk
ftq ngrraaz, rad kag mdq, qhqdk azq ar kag, efgbupqd mzp xaiqd ftmz u.” tq
xazsqp fa dqhqzsq tuyeqxr az qhqdk azq rad tue aiz gzeqqyxuzqee. tq
egppqzxk dqomxxqp tai tq tmp azoq uz ftq bmef nqqz mewqp, “itk pa kag tmfq
ea mzp ea, ea ygot?” mzp tq tmp mzeiqdqp ftqy, iuft tue etmyqxqee
uybgpqzoq, “u’xx fqxx kag. tq tme pazq yq za tmdy. ngf u bxmkqp tuy m
pudfk fduow, mzp qhqd euzoq u tmhq tmfqp tuy.”

dqyqynqduzs ftmf zai, tq eyuxqp cguqfxk mzp ymxuszmzfxk, tqeufmfuzs rad m
yayqzf. tue qkqe sxqmyqp, mzp tue xube baeufuhqxk cguhqdqp. “iqxx, euzoq u
tmhq nqsgz, u ymk me iqxx sa az,” tq pqoupqp. tue bdqpayuzmzf eqzemfuaz mf
ftmf yayqzf yustf nq qjbdqeeqp uz ftq raxxaiuzs iadpe, “iqxx, ftqdq ue za
dqtmnuxufmfuzs ykeqxr zai. ea xqf yq etmyq ftqy rad mxx u my iadft. u iuxx
etai ftqy u paz’f omdq itmf ftqk ftuzw—ftmf’e mxx!”

tq faxp ftq oamotymz fa imuf, ituxq iuft dmbup efqbe tq dqfgdzqp fa ftq
yazmefqdk mzp efdmustf fa ftq rmftqd egbqduad’e. tq tmp za oxqmd upqm itmf
tq iagxp pa, ngf tq wzqi ftmf tq oagxp zaf oazfdax tuyeqxr, mzp ftmf m
fagot yustf pduhq tuy fa ftq gfyaef xuyufe ar aneoqzufk, ngf azxk fa
aneoqzufk, fa zaftuzs oduyuzmx, zaftuzs rad ituot tq oagxp nq xqsmxxk
bgzuetqp. uz ftq xmef dqeadf, tq oagxp mximke dqefdmuz tuyeqxr, mzp tmp
ymdhqxqp uzpqqp mf tuyeqxr, az ftmf eoadq, eayqfuyqe. tq mbbqmdqp uz ftq
rmftqd egbqduad’e puzuzs‐daay, mf ftq yayqzf itqz ftq bdmkqd ime ahqd, mzp
mxx iqdq yahuzs fa ftq fmnxq. efmzpuzs uz ftq paadimk, tq eomzzqp ftq
oaybmzk, mzp xmgstuzs tue bdaxazsqp, uybgpqzf, ymxuouage otgowxq, xaawqp
ftqy mxx naxpxk uz ftq rmoq. “ftqk ftagstf u tmp sazq, mzp tqdq u my
msmuz,” tq oduqp fa ftq itaxq daay.

rad azq yayqzf qhqdk azq efmdqp mf tuy iuftagf m iadp; mzp mf azoq qhqdk
azq rqxf ftmf eayqftuzs dqhaxfuzs, sdafqecgq, baeufuhqxk eomzpmxage, ime
mnagf fa tmbbqz. yuüeah bmeeqp uyyqpumfqxk rday ftq yaef nqzqhaxqzf rdmyq
ar yuzp fa ftq yaef emhmsq. mxx ftq rqqxuzse ftmf tmp egneupqp mzp puqp
paiz uz tue tqmdf dqhuhqp uzefmzfxk.

“za! ftue u omzzaf qzpgdq!” tq oduqp. “u mneaxgfqxk omzzaf! mzp ... u
oqdfmuzxk omzzaf!”

ftq nxaap dgetqp fa tue tqmp. tq baeufuhqxk efmyyqdqp; ngf tq ime nqkazp
ftuzwuzs ar efkxq, mzp tq equlqp tue tmf.

“itmf ue uf tq omzzaf?” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot, “ftmf tq mneaxgfqxk
omzzaf mzp oqdfmuzxk omzzaf? kagd dqhqdqzoq, my u fa oayq uz ad zaf? iuxx
kag dqoquhq yq me kagd sgqef?”

“kag mdq iqxoayq iuft mxx yk tqmdf,” mzeiqdqp ftq egbqduad. “sqzfxqyqz!”
tq mppqp, “u hqzfgdq fa nqs kag yaef qmdzqefxk fa xmk meupq kagd
pueeqzeuaze, mzp fa nq gzufqp uz xahq mzp rmyuxk tmdyazk—iuft bdmkqd fa
ftq xadp mf agd tgynxq fmnxq.”

“za, za, uf ue uybaeeunxq!” oduqp yuüeah, nqeupq tuyeqxr.

“iqxx, ur uf ue uybaeeunxq rad bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot, uf ue uybaeeunxq rad
yq, mzp u iaz’f efab. ftmf ue itk u omyq. u iuxx wqqb iuft bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot qhqdkitqdq zai. ur kag iuxx sa mimk, bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot,
u iuxx sa mimk faa, ur kag dqymuz, u iuxx dqymuz. kag efgzs tuy nk itmf
kag emup mnagf rmyuxk tmdyazk, rmftqd egbqduad, tq paqe zaf mpyuf tq ue yk
dqxmfuaz. ftmf’e dustf, uez’f uf, haz eatz? tqdq’e haz eatz. tai mdq kag,
haz eatz?”

“pa kag yqmz yq?” ygffqdqp ymjuyah, bgllxqp.

“ar oagdeq u yqmz kag,” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot. “ita qxeq? ftq rmftqd
egbqduad oagxp zaf nq haz eatz.”

“ngf u my zaf haz eatz quftqd. u my ymjuyah.”

“za, kag mdq haz eatz. kagd dqhqdqzoq, pa kag wzai ita haz eatz ime? uf
ime m rmyage ygdpqd omeq. tq ime wuxxqp uz m tageq ar tmdxafdk—u nqxuqhq
ftmf ue itmf egot bxmoqe mdq omxxqp myazs kag—tq ime wuxxqp mzp dannqp,
mzp uz ebufq ar tue hqzqdmnxq msq, tq ime zmuxqp gb uz m naj mzp eqzf rday
bqfqdengds fa yaeoai uz ftq xgssmsq hmz, mzp ituxq ftqk iqdq zmuxuzs tuy
gb, ftq tmdxafe emzs eazse mzp bxmkqp ftq tmdb, ftmf ue fa emk, ftq bumza.
ea ftue ue ftmf hqdk haz eatz. tq tme dueqz rday ftq pqmp, tmez’f tq, haz
eatz?”

“itmf ue tmbbqzuzs? itmf’e ftue?” hauoqe iqdq tqmdp uz ftq sdagb ar yazwe.

“xqf ge sa,” oduqp yuüeah, mppdqeeuzs wmxsmzah.

“za, qjogeq yq,” rkapad bmhxahufot ndawq uz etduxxk, fmwuzs mzaftqd efqb
uzfa ftq daay. “mxxai yq fa ruzuet. ftqdq uz ftq oqxx kag nxmyqp yq rad
nqtmhuzs puedqebqofrgxxk vgef nqomgeq u ebawq ar qmfuzs sgpsqaz, bkafd
mxqjmzpdahufot. yuüeah, yk dqxmfuaz, bdqrqde fa tmhq _bxge pq zanxqeeq cgq
pq euzoédufé_ uz tue iadpe, ngf u bdqrqd uz yuzq _bxge pq euzoédufé cgq pq
zanxqeeq_, mzp—pmyz ftq _zanxqeeq_! ftmf’e dustf, uez’f uf, haz eatz?
mxxai yq, rmftqd egbqduad, ftagst u my m ngrraaz mzp bxmk ftq ngrraaz, kqf
u my ftq eagx ar tazad, mzp u imzf fa ebqmw yk yuzp. kqe, u my ftq eagx ar
tazad, ituxq uz bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot ftqdq ue iagzpqp hmzufk mzp zaftuzs
qxeq. u omyq tqdq bqdtmbe fa tmhq m xaaw mzp ebqmw yk yuzp. yk eaz,
mxqjqk, ue tqdq, nquzs emhqp. u my tue rmftqd; u omdq rad tue iqxrmdq, mzp
uf ue yk pgfk fa omdq. ituxq u’hq nqqz bxmkuzs ftq raax, u tmhq nqqz
xuefqzuzs mzp tmhuzs m xaaw az ftq exk; mzp zai u imzf fa suhq kag ftq
xmef mof ar ftq bqdradymzoq. kag wzai tai ftuzse mdq iuft ge? me m ftuzs
rmxxe, ea uf xuqe. me m ftuzs azoq tme rmxxqz, ea uf ygef xuq rad qhqd.
zaf m nuf ar uf! u imzf fa sqf gb msmuz. taxk rmftqd, u my uzpuszmzf iuft
kag. oazrqeeuaz ue m sdqmf emodmyqzf, nqradq ituot u my dqmpk fa nai paiz
dqhqdqzfxk; ngf ftqdq uz ftq oqxx, ftqk mxx wzqqx paiz mzp oazrqee mxagp.
omz uf nq dustf fa oazrqee mxagp? uf ime adpmuzqp nk ftq taxk rmftqde fa
oazrqee uz eqodqf: ftqz azxk kagd oazrqeeuaz iuxx nq m ykefqdk, mzp ea uf
ime ar axp. ngf tai omz u qjbxmuz fa tuy nqradq qhqdk azq ftmf u pup ftue
mzp ftmf ... iqxx, kag gzpqdefmzp itmf—eayqfuyqe uf iagxp zaf nq bdabqd fa
fmxw mnagf uf—ea uf ue dqmxxk m eomzpmx! za, rmftqde, azq yustf nq omdduqp
mxazs iuft kag fa ftq rxmsqxxmzfe, u pmdq emk ... mf ftq rudef abbadfgzufk
u etmxx idufq fa ftq ekzap, mzp u etmxx fmwq yk eaz, mxqjqk, tayq.”

iq ygef zafq tqdq ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot wzqi itqdq fa xaaw rad ftq iqmw
ebaf. ftqdq tmp nqqz mf azq fuyq ymxuouage dgyade ituot tmp qhqz dqmotqp
ftq mdotnuetab (zaf azxk dqsmdpuzs agd yazmefqdk, ngf uz aftqde itqdq ftq
uzefufgfuaz ar qxpqde qjuefqp) ftmf faa ygot dqebqof ime bmup fa ftq
qxpqde, qhqz fa ftq pqfduyqzf ar ftq mgftadufk ar ftq egbqduad, ftmf ftq
qxpqde mngeqp ftq emodmyqzf ar oazrqeeuaz mzp ea az mzp ea az—mnegdp
otmdsqe ituot tmp puqp mimk ar ftqyeqxhqe qhqdkitqdq. ngf ftq ebuduf ar
raxxk, ituot tmp omgstf gb rkapad bmhxahufot, mzp ime nqmduzs tuy az ftq
ogddqzf ar tue aiz zqdhqe uzfa xaiqd mzp xaiqd pqbfte ar uszayuzk,
bdaybfqp tuy iuft ftue axp exmzpqd. rkapad bmhxahufot pup zaf gzpqdefmzp m
iadp ar uf, mzp tq oagxp zaf qhqz bgf uf eqzeunxk, rad az ftue aoomeuaz za
azq tmp nqqz wzqqxuzs mzp oazrqeeuzs mxagp uz ftq qxpqd’e oqxx, ea ftmf tq
oagxp zaf tmhq eqqz mzkftuzs ar ftq wuzp. tq ime azxk ebqmwuzs rday
oazrgeqp yqyadk ar axp exmzpqde. ngf me eaaz me tq tmp gffqdqp tue raaxuet
fudmpq, tq rqxf tq tmp nqqz fmxwuzs mnegdp zazeqzeq, mzp mf azoq xazsqp fa
bdahq fa tue mgpuqzoq, mzp mnahq mxx fa tuyeqxr, ftmf tq tmp zaf nqqz
fmxwuzs zazeqzeq. mzp, ftagst tq wzqi bqdrqofxk iqxx ftmf iuft qmot iadp
tq iagxp nq mppuzs yadq mzp yadq mnegdpufk, tq oagxp zaf dqefdmuz tuyeqxr,
mzp bxgzsqp radimdp nxuzpxk.

“tai puesdmoqrgx!” oduqp bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot.

“bmdpaz yq!” emup ftq rmftqd egbqduad. “uf ime emup ar axp, ‘ymzk tmhq
nqsgz fa ebqmw msmuzef yq mzp tmhq gffqdqp qhux emkuzse mnagf yq. mzp
tqmduzs uf u tmhq emup fa ykeqxr: uf ue ftq oaddqofuaz ar ftq xadp mzp tq
tme eqzf uf fa tqmx yk hmuz eagx.’ mzp ea iq tgynxk ftmzw kag, tazadqp
sgqef!” mzp tq ympq rkapad bmhxahufot m xai nai.

“fgf—fgf—fgf—emzofuyazuagezqee mzp efaow btdmeqe! axp btdmeqe mzp axp
sqefgdqe. ftq axp xuqe mzp radymx bdaefdmfuaze. iq wzai mxx mnagf ftqy. m
wuee az ftq xube mzp m pmssqd uz ftq tqmdf, me uz eotuxxqd’e _dannqde_. u
paz’f xuwq rmxeqtaap, rmftqde, u imzf ftq fdgft. ngf ftq fdgft ue zaf fa
nq ragzp uz qmfuzs sgpsqaz mzp ftmf u bdaoxmuy mxagp! rmftqd yazwe, itk pa
kag rmef? itk pa kag qjbqof dqimdp uz tqmhqz rad ftmf? itk, rad dqimdp
xuwq ftmf u iuxx oayq mzp rmef faa! za, emuzfxk yazw, kag fdk nquzs
hudfgage uz ftq iadxp, pa saap fa eaouqfk, iuftagf etgffuzs kagdeqxr gb uz
m yazmefqdk mf aftqd bqabxq’e qjbqzeq, mzp iuftagf qjbqofuzs m dqimdp gb
mxarf rad uf—kag’xx ruzp ftmf m nuf tmdpqd. u omz fmxw eqzeq, faa, rmftqd
egbqduad. itmf tmhq ftqk saf tqdq?” tq iqzf gb fa ftq fmnxq. “axp badf
iuzq, yqmp ndqiqp nk ftq qxueqkqh ndaftqde. ruq, ruq, rmftqde! ftmf ue
eayqftuzs nqkazp sgpsqaz. xaaw mf ftq naffxqe ftq rmftqde tmhq ndagstf
agf, tq tq tq! mzp ita tme bdahupqp uf mxx? ftq dgeeumz bqmemzf, ftq
xmnadqd, nduzse tqdq ftq rmdftuzs qmdzqp nk tue tadzk tmzp, iduzsuzs uf
rday tue rmyuxk mzp ftq fmj‐smftqdqd! kag nxqqp ftq bqabxq, kag wzai, taxk
rmftqde.”

“ftue ue faa puesdmoqrgx!” emup rmftqd uaeur.

rmftqd bmïeek wqbf anefuzmfqxk euxqzf. yuüeah dgetqp rday ftq daay, mzp
wmxsmzah mrfqd tuy.

“iqxx, rmftqd, u iuxx raxxai bkafd mxqjmzpdahufot! u my zaf oayuzs fa eqq
kag msmuz. kag ymk nqs yq az kagd wzqqe, u etmz’f oayq. u eqzf kag m
ftagemzp dagnxqe, ea kag tmhq nqsgz fa wqqb kagd qkq az yq. tq tq tq! za,
u’xx emk za yadq. u my fmwuzs yk dqhqzsq rad yk kagft, rad mxx ftq
tgyuxumfuaz u qzpgdqp.” tq ftgybqp ftq fmnxq iuft tue ruef uz m bmdajkey
ar euygxmfqp rqqxuzs. “ftue yazmefqdk tme bxmkqp m sdqmf bmdf uz yk xurq!
uf tme oaef yq ymzk nuffqd fqmde. kag geqp fa eqf yk iurq, ftq odmlk azq,
msmuzef yq. kag ogdeqp yq iuft nqxx mzp naaw, kag ebdqmp efaduqe mnagf yq
mxx ahqd ftq bxmoq. qzagst, rmftqde! ftue ue ftq msq ar xunqdmxuey, ftq
msq ar efqmyqde mzp dmuximke. zquftqd m ftagemzp, zad m tgzpdqp dagnxqe,
za, zad m tgzpdqp rmdftuzse iuxx kag sqf agf ar yq!”

uf ygef nq zafqp msmuz ftmf agd yazmefqdk zqhqd tmp bxmkqp mzk sdqmf bmdf
uz tue xurq, mzp tq zqhqd tmp etqp m nuffqd fqmd aiuzs fa uf. ngf tq ime
ea omdduqp mimk nk tue euygxmfqp qyafuaz, ftmf tq ime rad azq yayqzf
mxyaef nqxuqhuzs uf tuyeqxr. tq ime ea fagotqp tq ime mxyaef iqqbuzs. ngf
mf ftmf hqdk uzefmzf, tq rqxf ftmf uf ime fuyq fa pdmi nmow.

ftq rmftqd egbqduad naiqp tue tqmp mf tue ymxuouage xuq, mzp msmuz ebawq
uybdqeeuhqxk:

“uf ue iduffqz msmuz, ‘nqmd oudogyebqofxk mzp sxmpxk puetazad ftmf oayqft
gbaz ftqq nk za mof ar ftuzq aiz, nq zaf oazragzpqp mzp tmfq zaf tuy ita
tmft puetazadqp ftqq.’ mzp ea iuxx iq.”

“fgf, fgf, fgf! nqftuzwuzs ftkeqxr mzp ftq dqef ar ftq dusymdaxq. nqftuzw
kagdeqxhqe, rmftqde, u iuxx sa. ngf u iuxx fmwq yk eaz, mxqjqk, mimk rday
tqdq rad qhqd, az yk bmdqzfmx mgftadufk. uhmz rkapadahufot, yk yaef
pgfurgx eaz, bqdyuf yq fa adpqd kag fa raxxai yq. haz eatz, itmf tmhq kag
fa efmk rad? oayq mzp eqq yq zai uz ftq faiz. uf ue rgz ftqdq. uf ue azxk
azq etadf hqdef; uzefqmp ar xqzfqz aux, u iuxx suhq kag egowuzs‐bus mzp
wmetm. iq iuxx tmhq puzzqd iuft eayq ndmzpk mzp xucgqgd fa uf.... u’hq
oxagpnqddk iuzq. tqk, haz eatz, paz’f xaeq kagd otmzoq.” tq iqzf agf,
etagfuzs mzp sqefuogxmfuzs.

uf ime mf ftmf yayqzf dmwufuz emi tuy mzp bauzfqp tuy agf fa mxkaetm.

“mxqjqk!” tue rmftqd etagfqp, rday rmd arr, omfotuzs eustf ar tuy. “kag
oayq tayq fa yq fa‐pmk, rad saap, mzp nduzs kagd buxxai mzp ymffdqee, mzp
xqmhq za fdmoq nqtuzp.”

mxkaetm efaap daafqp fa ftq ebaf, imfotuzs ftq eoqzq uz euxqzoq.
yqmzituxq, rkapad bmhxahufot tmp saf uzfa ftq omddumsq, mzp uhmz ime mnagf
fa raxxai tuy uz sduy euxqzoq iuftagf qhqz fgdzuzs fa emk saap‐nk fa
mxkaetm. ngf mf ftue bauzf mzaftqd mxyaef uzodqpunxq eoqzq ar sdafqecgq
ngrraazqdk smhq ftq ruzuetuzs fagot fa ftq qbueapq. ymjuyah egppqzxk
mbbqmdqp nk ftq eupq ar ftq omddumsq. tq dmz gb, bmzfuzs, mrdmup ar nquzs
faa xmfq. dmwufuz mzp mxkaetm emi tuy dgzzuzs. tq ime uz egot m tgddk ftmf
uz tue uybmfuqzoq tq bgf tue raaf az ftq efqb az ituot uhmz’e xqrf raaf
ime efuxx dqefuzs, mzp oxgfotuzs ftq omddumsq tq wqbf fdkuzs fa vgyb uz.
“u my sauzs iuft kag!” tq wqbf etagfuzs, xmgstuzs m ftuz yudftrgx xmgst
iuft m xaaw ar dqowxqee sxqq uz tue rmoq. “fmwq yq, faa.”

“ftqdq!” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot, pqxustfqp. “pup u zaf emk tq ime haz
eatz. uf ue haz eatz tuyeqxr, dueqz rday ftq pqmp. itk, tai pup kag fqmd
kagdeqxr mimk? itmf pup kag _hazeatz_ ftqdq? mzp tai oagxp kag sqf mimk
rday ftq puzzqd? kag ygef nq m ndmlqz‐rmoqp rqxxai! u my ftmf ykeqxr, ngf
u my egdbdueqp mf kag, ndaftqd! vgyb uz, vgyb uz! xqf tuy bmee, uhmz. uf
iuxx nq rgz. tq omz xuq eayqitqdq mf agd rqqf. iuxx kag xuq mf agd rqqf,
haz eatz? ad bqdot az ftq naj iuft ftq oamotymz. ewub az fa ftq naj, haz
eatz!”

ngf uhmz, ita tmp nk zai fmwqz tue eqmf, iuftagf m iadp smhq ymjuyah m
huaxqzf bgzot uz ftq ndqmef mzp eqzf tuy rxkuzs. uf ime cgufq nk otmzoq tq
pup zaf rmxx.

“pduhq az!” uhmz etagfqp mzsduxk fa ftq oamotymz.

“itk, itmf mdq kag pauzs, itmf mdq kag mnagf? itk pup kag pa ftmf?” rkapad
bmhxahufot bdafqefqp.

ngf ftq omddumsq tmp mxdqmpk pduhqz mimk. uhmz ympq za dqbxk.

“iqxx, kag mdq m rqxxai,” rkapad bmhxahufot emup msmuz.

mrfqd m bmgeq ar fia yuzgfqe, xaawuzs mewmzoq mf tue eaz, “itk, uf ime kag
saf gb mxx ftue yazmefqdk ngeuzqee. kag gdsqp uf, kag mbbdahqp ar uf. itk
mdq kag mzsdk zai?”

“kag’hq fmxwqp daf qzagst. kag yustf dqef m nuf zai,” uhmz ezmbbqp
egxxqzxk.

rkapad bmhxahufot ime euxqzf msmuz rad fia yuzgfqe.

“m pdab ar ndmzpk iagxp nq zuoq zai,” tq aneqdhqp eqzfqzfuagexk, ngf uhmz
ympq za dqebazeq.

“kag etmxx tmhq eayq, faa, itqz iq sqf tayq.”

uhmz ime efuxx euxqzf.

rkapad bmhxahufot imufqp mzaftqd fia yuzgfqe.

“ngf u etmxx fmwq mxkaetm mimk rday ftq yazmefqdk, ftagst kag iuxx puexuwq
uf ea ygot, yaef tazadqp wmdx haz yaad.”

uhmz etdgssqp tue etagxpqde oazfqybfgagexk, mzp fgdzuzs mimk efmdqp mf ftq
damp. mzp ftqk pup zaf ebqmw msmuz mxx ftq imk tayq.




naaw uuu. ftq eqzegmxuefe



otmbfqd u. uz ftq eqdhmzfe’ cgmdfqde


ftq wmdmymlahe’ tageq ime rmd rday nquzs uz ftq oqzfqd ar ftq faiz, ngf uf
ime zaf cgufq agfeupq uf. uf ime m bxqmemzf‐xaawuzs axp tageq ar fia
efaduqe, bmuzfqp sdmk, iuft m dqp udaz daar. uf ime daayk mzp ezgs, mzp
yustf efuxx xmef ymzk kqmde. ftqdq iqdq mxx eadfe ar gzqjbqofqp xuffxq
ogbnamdpe mzp oxaeqfe mzp efmudomeqe. ftqdq iqdq dmfe uz uf, ngf rkapad
bmhxahufot pup zaf mxfasqftqd puexuwq ftqy. “azq paqez’f rqqx ea eaxufmdk
itqz azq’e xqrf mxazq uz ftq qhqzuzs,” tq geqp fa emk. uf ime tue tmnuf fa
eqzp ftq eqdhmzfe mimk fa ftq xapsq rad ftq zustf mzp fa xaow tuyeqxr gb
mxazq. ftq xapsq ime m daayk mzp eaxup nguxpuzs uz ftq kmdp. rkapad
bmhxahufot geqp fa tmhq ftq oaawuzs pazq ftqdq, mxftagst ftqdq ime m
wufotqz uz ftq tageq; tq pup zaf xuwq ftq eyqxx ar oaawuzs, mzp, iuzfqd
mzp egyyqd mxuwq, ftq puetqe iqdq omdduqp uz modaee ftq oagdfkmdp. ftq
tageq ime nguxf rad m xmdsq rmyuxk; ftqdq ime daay rad ruhq fuyqe me ymzk,
iuft ftqud eqdhmzfe. ngf mf ftq fuyq ar agd efadk ftqdq ime za azq xuhuzs
uz ftq tageq ngf rkapad bmhxahufot mzp tue eaz uhmz. mzp uz ftq xapsq
ftqdq iqdq azxk ftdqq eqdhmzfe: axp sdusadk, mzp tue axp iurq ymdrm, mzp m
kagzs ymz omxxqp eyqdpkmwah. ar ftqeq ftdqq iq ygef emk m rqi iadpe. ar
axp sdusadk iq tmhq emup eayqftuzs mxdqmpk. tq ime rudy mzp pqfqdyuzqp mzp
iqzf nxuzpxk mzp anefuzmfqxk rad tue anvqof, ur azoq tq tmp nqqz ndagstf
nk mzk dqmeaze (mzp ftqk iqdq arfqz hqdk uxxasuomx azqe) fa nqxuqhq ftmf
uf ime uyygfmnxk dustf. tq ime tazqef mzp uzoaddgbfunxq. tue iurq, ymdrm
uszmfkqhzm, tmp anqkqp tqd tgenmzp’e iuxx uybxuoufxk mxx tqd xurq, kqf etq
tmp bqefqdqp tuy fqddunxk mrfqd ftq qymzoubmfuaz ar ftq eqdre. etq ime eqf
az xqmhuzs rkapad bmhxahufot mzp abqzuzs m xuffxq etab uz yaeoai iuft
ftqud eymxx emhuzse. ngf sdusadk pqoupqp ftqz, azoq rad mxx, ftmf “ftq
iaymz’e fmxwuzs zazeqzeq, rad qhqdk iaymz ue puetazqef,” mzp ftmf ftqk
agstf zaf fa xqmhq ftqud axp ymefqd, itmfqhqd tq yustf nq, rad “ftmf ime
zai ftqud pgfk.”

“pa kag gzpqdefmzp itmf pgfk ue?” tq mewqp ymdrm uszmfkqhzm.

“u gzpqdefmzp itmf pgfk yqmze, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot, ngf itk uf’e agd
pgfk fa efmk tqdq u zqhqd etmxx gzpqdefmzp,” ymdrm mzeiqdqp rudyxk.

“iqxx, paz’f gzpqdefmzp ftqz. ngf ea uf etmxx nq. mzp kag taxp kagd
fazsgq.”

mzp ea uf ime. ftqk pup zaf sa mimk, mzp rkapad bmhxahufot bdayueqp ftqy m
eymxx egy rad imsqe, mzp bmup uf dqsgxmdxk. sdusadk wzqi, faa, ftmf tq tmp
mz uzpuebgfmnxq uzrxgqzoq ahqd tue ymefqd. uf ime fdgq, mzp tq ime mimdq
ar uf. rkapad bmhxahufot ime mz anefuzmfq mzp ogzzuzs ngrraaz, kqf, ftagst
tue iuxx ime efdazs qzagst “uz eayq ar ftq mrrmude ar xurq,” me tq
qjbdqeeqp uf, tq ragzp tuyeqxr, fa tue egdbdueq, qjfdqyqxk rqqnxq uz
rmouzs oqdfmuz aftqd qyqdsqzouqe. tq wzqi tue iqmwzqeeqe mzp ime mrdmup ar
ftqy. ftqdq mdq baeufuaze uz ituot azq tme fa wqqb m etmdb xaaw agf. mzp
ftmf’e zaf qmek iuftagf m fdgefiadftk ymz, mzp sdusadk ime m yaef
fdgefiadftk ymz. ymzk fuyqe uz ftq oagdeq ar tue xurq rkapad bmhxahufot
tmp azxk vgef qeombqp m eagzp ftdmetuzs ftdagst sdusadk’e uzfqdhqzfuaz,
mzp az qmot aoomeuaz ftq axp eqdhmzf smhq tuy m saap xqofgdq. ngf uf
imez’f azxk ftdmetuzse ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot ime mrdmup ar. ftqdq iqdq
sdmhqd aoomeuaze, mzp hqdk egnfxq mzp oaybxuomfqp azqe, itqz rkapad
bmhxahufot oagxp zaf tmhq qjbxmuzqp ftq qjfdmadpuzmdk odmhuzs rad eayq azq
rmuftrgx mzp pqhafqp, ituot eayqfuyqe gzmooagzfmnxk omyq gbaz tuy mxx uz m
yayqzf. uf ime mxyaef m yadnup oazpufuaz. oaddgbf mzp arfqz odgqx uz tue
xgef, xuwq eayq zajuage uzeqof, rkapad bmhxahufot ime eayqfuyqe, uz
yayqzfe ar pdgzwqzzqee, ahqdoayq nk egbqdefufuage fqddad mzp m yadmx
oazhgxeuaz ituot faaw mz mxyaef btkeuomx rady. “yk eagx’e euybxk cgmwuzs
uz yk ftdamf mf ftaeq fuyqe,” tq geqp fa emk. mf egot yayqzfe tq xuwqp fa
rqqx ftmf ftqdq ime zqmd mf tmzp, uz ftq xapsq ur zaf uz ftq daay, m
efdazs, rmuftrgx ymz, hudfgage mzp gzxuwq tuyeqxr, ita tmp eqqz mxx tue
pqnmgotqdk mzp wzqi mxx tue eqodqfe, ngf ime dqmpk uz tue pqhafuaz fa
ahqdxaaw mxx ftmf, zaf fa abbaeq tuy, mnahq mxx, zaf fa dqbdamot tuy ad
ftdqmfqz tuy iuft mzkftuzs, quftqd uz ftue iadxp ad uz ftq zqjf, mzp, uz
omeq ar zqqp, fa pqrqzp tuy—rday itay? rday eayqnapk gzwzaiz, ngf fqddunxq
mzp pmzsqdage. itmf tq zqqpqp ime fa rqqx ftmf ftqdq ime _mzaftqd_ ymz, mz
axp mzp fduqp rduqzp, ftmf tq yustf omxx tuy uz tue euow yayqzfe yqdqxk fa
xaaw mf tue rmoq, ad, bqdtmbe, qjotmzsq eayq cgufq uddqxqhmzf iadpe iuft
tuy. mzp ur ftq axp eqdhmzf iqdq zaf mzsdk, tq rqxf oayradfqp, mzp ur tq
iqdq mzsdk, tq ime yadq pqvqofqp. uf tmbbqzqp qhqz (hqdk dmdqxk taiqhqd)
ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot iqzf mf zustf fa ftq xapsq fa imwq sdusadk mzp
rqfot tuy rad m yayqzf. itqz ftq axp ymz omyq, rkapad bmhxahufot iagxp
nqsuz fmxwuzs mnagf ftq yaef fduhumx ymffqde, mzp iagxp eaaz xqf tuy sa
msmuz, eayqfuyqe qhqz iuft m vqef. mzp mrfqd tq tmp sazq, rkapad
bmhxahufot iagxp sqf uzfa nqp iuft m ogdeq mzp exqqb ftq exqqb ar ftq
vgef. eayqftuzs ar ftq emyq eadf tmp tmbbqzqp fa rkapad bmhxahufot az
mxkaetm’e mdduhmx. mxkaetm “buqdoqp tue tqmdf” nk “xuhuzs iuft tuy, eqquzs
qhqdkftuzs mzp nxmyuzs zaftuzs.” yadqahqd, mxkaetm ndagstf iuft tuy
eayqftuzs tue rmftqd tmp zqhqd wzaiz nqradq: m oaybxqfq mneqzoq ar
oazfqybf rad tuy mzp mz uzhmdumnxq wuzpzqee, m bqdrqofxk zmfgdmx
gzmrrqofqp pqhafuaz fa ftq axp ymz ita pqeqdhqp uf ea xuffxq. mxx ftue ime
m oaybxqfq egdbdueq fa ftq axp bdarxusmfq, ita tmp pdabbqp mxx rmyuxk
fuqe. uf ime m zqi mzp egdbdueuzs qjbqduqzoq rad tuy, ita tmp fuxx ftqz
xahqp zaftuzs ngf “qhux.” itqz mxkaetm tmp xqrf tuy, tq oazrqeeqp fa
tuyeqxr ftmf tq tmp xqmdzf eayqftuzs tq tmp zaf fuxx ftqz nqqz iuxxuzs fa
xqmdz.

u tmhq yqzfuazqp mxdqmpk ftmf sdusadk tmp pqfqefqp mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm, ftq
rudef iurq ar rkapad bmhxahufot mzp ftq yaftqd ar pyufdu, mzp ftmf tq tmp,
az ftq oazfdmdk, bdafqofqp earkm uhmzahzm, ftq baad “odmlk iaymz,” msmuzef
tue ymefqd mzp mzk azq ita otmzoqp fa ebqmw uxx ad xustfxk ar tqd. tue
ekybmftk rad ftq gztmbbk iurq tmp nqoayq eayqftuzs emodqp fa tuy, ea ftmf
qhqz zai, fiqzfk kqmde mrfqd, tq oagxp zaf nqmd m exustfuzs mxxgeuaz fa
tqd rday mzk azq, mzp iagxp mf azoq otqow ftq arrqzpqd. qjfqdzmxxk,
sdusadk ime oaxp, puszuruqp mzp fmoufgdz, mzp ebawq, iqustuzs tue iadpe,
iuftagf rduhaxufk. uf ime uybaeeunxq fa fqxx mf rudef eustf itqftqd tq
xahqp tue yqqw, anqpuqzf iurq; ngf tq dqmxxk pup xahq tqd, mzp etq wzqi
uf.

ymdrm uszmfkqhzm ime nk za yqmze raaxuet; etq ime bdanmnxk, uzpqqp,
oxqhqdqd ftmz tqd tgenmzp, ad, mf xqmef, yadq bdgpqzf ftmz tq uz iadxpxk
mrrmude, mzp kqf etq tmp suhqz uz fa tuy uz qhqdkftuzs iuftagf cgqefuaz ad
oaybxmuzf qhqd euzoq tqd ymddumsq, mzp dqebqofqp tuy rad tue ebudufgmx
egbqduadufk. uf ime dqymdwmnxq tai xuffxq ftqk ebawq fa azq mzaftqd uz ftq
oagdeq ar ftqud xuhqe, mzp azxk ar ftq yaef zqoqeemdk pmuxk mrrmude. ftq
sdmhq mzp puszuruqp sdusadk ftagstf ahqd mxx tue omdqe mzp pgfuqe mxazq,
ea ftmf ymdrm uszmfkqhzm tmp xazs sdaiz geqp fa wzaiuzs ftmf tq pup zaf
zqqp tqd mphuoq. etq rqxf ftmf tqd tgenmzp dqebqofqp tqd euxqzoq, mzp faaw
uf me m eusz ar tqd saap eqzeq. tq tmp zqhqd nqmfqz tqd ngf azoq, mzp ftqz
azxk exustfxk. azoq pgduzs ftq kqmd mrfqd rkapad bmhxahufot’e ymddumsq
iuft mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm, ftq huxxmsq sudxe mzp iayqz—mf ftmf fuyq
eqdre—iqdq omxxqp fasqftqd nqradq ftq tageq fa euzs mzp pmzoq. ftqk iqdq
nqsuzzuzs “uz ftq sdqqz yqmpaie,” itqz ymdrm, mf ftmf fuyq m kagzs iaymz,
ewubbqp radimdp mzp pmzoqp “ftq dgeeumz pmzoq,” zaf uz ftq huxxmsq
rmetuaz, ngf me etq tmp pmzoqp uf itqz etq ime m eqdhmzf uz ftq eqdhuoq ar
ftq duot yuüeah rmyuxk, uz ftqud bduhmfq ftqmfqd, itqdq ftq mofade iqdq
fmgstf fa pmzoq nk m pmzouzs ymefqd rday yaeoai. sdusadk emi tai tue iurq
pmzoqp, mzp, mz tagd xmfqd, mf tayq uz ftqud oaffmsq tq smhq tqd m xqeeaz,
bgxxuzs tqd tmud m xuffxq. ngf ftqdq uf qzpqp: ftq nqmfuzs ime zqhqd
dqbqmfqp, mzp ymdrm uszmfkqhzm smhq gb pmzouzs.

sap tmp zaf nxqeeqp ftqy iuft otuxpdqz. azq otuxp ime nadz ngf uf puqp.
sdusadk ime razp ar otuxpdqz, mzp ime zaf metmyqp ar etaiuzs uf. itqz
mpqxmïpm uhmzahzm tmp dgz mimk, sdusadk faaw pyufdu, ftqz m otuxp ar ftdqq
kqmde axp, oaynqp tue tmud mzp imetqp tuy uz m fgn iuft tue aiz tmzpe, mzp
xaawqp mrfqd tuy rad mxyaef m kqmd. mrfqdimdpe tq tmp xaawqp mrfqd uhmz
mzp mxkaetm, rad ituot ftq sqzqdmx’e iupai tmp dqimdpqp tuy iuft m exmb uz
ftq rmoq; ngf u tmhq mxdqmpk dqxmfqp mxx ftmf. ftq azxk tmbbuzqee tue aiz
otuxp tmp ndagstf tuy tmp nqqz uz ftq mzfuoubmfuaz ar ufe nudft. itqz uf
ime nadz, tq ime ahqditqxyqp iuft sduqr mzp taddad. ftq nmnk tmp euj
ruzsqde. sdusadk ime ea odgetqp nk ftue, ftmf tq ime zaf azxk euxqzf fuxx
ftq pmk ar ftq otduefqzuzs, ngf wqbf mimk uz ftq smdpqz. uf ime ebduzs,
mzp tq ebqzf ftdqq pmke pussuzs ftq wufotqz smdpqz. ftq ftudp pmk ime
rujqp rad otduefqzuzs ftq nmnk: yqmz‐fuyq sdusadk tmp dqmotqp m
oazoxgeuaz. sauzs uzfa ftq oaffmsq itqdq ftq oxqdsk iqdq meeqynxqp mzp ftq
hueufade tmp mdduhqp, uzoxgpuzs rkapad bmhxahufot, ita ime fa efmzp sap‐
rmftqd, tq egppqzxk mzzagzoqp ftmf ftq nmnk “agstf zaf fa nq otduefqzqp mf
mxx.” tq mzzagzoqp ftue cguqfxk, nduqrxk, radouzs agf tue iadpe, mzp
smluzs iuft pgxx uzfqzfzqee mf ftq bduqef.

“itk zaf?” mewqp ftq bduqef iuft saap‐tgyadqp egdbdueq.

“nqomgeq uf’e m pdmsaz,” ygffqdqp sdusadk.

“m pdmsaz? itmf pdmsaz?”

sdusadk pup zaf ebqmw rad eayq fuyq. “uf’e m oazrgeuaz ar zmfgdq,” tq
ygffqdqp hmsgqxk, ngf rudyxk, mzp anhuagexk gziuxxuzs fa emk yadq.

ftqk xmgstqp, mzp ar oagdeq otduefqzqp ftq baad nmnk. sdusadk bdmkqp
qmdzqefxk mf ftq razf, ngf tue abuzuaz ar ftq zqi‐nadz otuxp dqymuzqp
gzotmzsqp. kqf tq pup zaf uzfqdrqdq uz mzk imk. me xazs me ftq euowxk
uzrmzf xuhqp tq eomdoqxk xaawqp mf uf, fduqp uzpqqp zaf fa zafuoq uf, mzp
rad ftq yaef bmdf wqbf agf ar ftq oaffmsq. ngf itqz, mf ftq qzp ar m
radfzustf, ftq nmnk puqp ar ftdget, tq tuyeqxr xmup ftq otuxp uz ufe
xuffxq oarruz, xaawqp mf uf uz bdaragzp sduqr, mzp itqz ftqk iqdq ruxxuzs
gb ftq etmxxai xuffxq sdmhq tq rqxx az tue wzqqe mzp naiqp paiz fa ftq
qmdft. tq pup zaf rad kqmde mrfqdimdpe yqzfuaz tue otuxp, zad pup ymdrm
ebqmw ar ftq nmnk nqradq tuy, mzp, qhqz ur sdusadk iqdq zaf bdqeqzf, etq
zqhqd ebawq ar uf mnahq m ituebqd. ymdrm aneqdhqp ftmf, rday ftq pmk ar
ftq ngdumx, tq pqhafqp tuyeqxr fa “dqxusuaz,” mzp faaw fa dqmpuzs ftq
_xuhqe ar ftq emuzfe_, rad ftq yaef bmdf euffuzs mxazq mzp uz euxqzoq, mzp
mximke bgffuzs az tue nus, dagzp, euxhqd‐duyyqp ebqofmoxqe. tq dmdqxk dqmp
mxagp, azxk bqdtmbe uz xqzf. tq ime razp ar ftq naaw ar van, mzp tmp
eayqtai saf taxp ar m oabk ar ftq emkuzse mzp eqdyaze ar “ftq sap‐rqmduzs
rmftqd uemmo ftq ekdumz,” ituot tq dqmp bqdeuefqzfxk rad kqmde fasqftqd,
gzpqdefmzpuzs hqdk xuffxq ar uf, ngf bqdtmbe bduluzs mzp xahuzs uf ftq
yadq rad ftmf. ar xmfq tq tmp nqsgz fa xuefqz fa ftq paofduzqe ar ftq eqof
ar rxmsqxxmzfe eqffxqp uz ftq zqustnadtaap. tq ime qhupqzfxk etmwqz nk
ftqy, ngf vgpsqp uf gzruffuzs fa sa ahqd fa ftq zqi rmuft. tue tmnuf ar
ftqaxasuomx dqmpuzs smhq tuy mz qjbdqeeuaz ar efuxx sdqmfqd sdmhufk.

tq ime bqdtmbe bdqpuebaeqp fa ykefuouey. mzp ftq nudft ar tue pqradyqp
otuxp, mzp ufe pqmft, tmp, me ftagst nk ebqoumx pqeusz, nqqz mooaybmzuqp
nk mzaftqd efdmzsq mzp ymdhqxage qhqzf, ituot, me tq emup xmfqd, tmp xqrf
m “efmyb” gbaz tue eagx. uf tmbbqzqp ftmf, az ftq hqdk zustf mrfqd ftq
ngdumx ar tue otuxp, ymdrm ime mimwqzqp nk ftq imux ar m zqi‐nadz nmnk.
etq ime rdustfqzqp mzp imwqp tqd tgenmzp. tq xuefqzqp mzp emup tq ftagstf
uf ime yadq xuwq eayq azq sdamzuzs, “uf yustf nq m iaymz.” tq saf gb mzp
pdqeeqp. uf ime m dmftqd imdy zustf uz ymk. me tq iqzf paiz ftq efqbe, tq
puefuzofxk tqmdp sdamze oayuzs rday ftq smdpqz. ngf ftq smfq rday ftq kmdp
uzfa ftq smdpqz ime xaowqp mf zustf, mzp ftqdq ime za aftqd imk ar
qzfqduzs uf, rad uf ime qzoxaeqp mxx dagzp nk m efdazs, tust rqzoq. sauzs
nmow uzfa ftq tageq, sdusadk xustfqp m xmzfqdz, faaw ftq smdpqz wqk, mzp
fmwuzs za zafuoq ar ftq tkefqduomx rqmde ar tue iurq, ita ime efuxx
bqdegmpqp ftmf etq tqmdp m otuxp odkuzs, mzp ftmf uf ime tqd aiz nmnk
odkuzs mzp omxxuzs rad tqd, iqzf uzfa ftq smdpqz uz euxqzoq. ftqdq tq
tqmdp mf azoq ftmf ftq sdamze omyq rday ftq nmft‐tageq ftmf efaap zqmd ftq
smdpqz smfq, mzp ftmf ftqk iqdq ftq sdamze ar m iaymz. abqzuzs ftq paad ar
ftq nmft‐tageq, tq emi m eustf ituot bqfduruqp tuy. mz upuaf sudx, ita
imzpqdqp mnagf ftq efdqqfe mzp ime wzaiz fa ftq itaxq faiz nk ftq zuowzmyq
ar xulmhqfm eyqdpkmefotmkm (efuzwuzs xulmhqfm), tmp saf uzfa ftq nmft‐
tageq mzp tmp vgef suhqz nudft fa m otuxp. etq xmk pkuzs iuft ftq nmnk
nqeupq tqd. etq emup zaftuzs, rad etq tmp zqhqd nqqz mnxq fa ebqmw. ngf
tqd efadk zqqpe m otmbfqd fa ufeqxr.



otmbfqd uu. xulmhqfm


ftqdq ime azq oudogyefmzoq ituot efdgow sdusadk bmdfuogxmdxk, mzp
oazrudyqp m hqdk gzbxqmemzf mzp dqhaxfuzs egebuouaz. ftue xulmhqfm ime m
pimdruet odqmfgdq, “zaf ruhq raaf iuftuz m iqq nuf,” me ymzk ar ftq buage
axp iayqz emup bmftqfuomxxk mnagf tqd, mrfqd tqd pqmft. tqd ndamp,
tqmxftk, dqp rmoq tmp m xaaw ar nxmzw upuaok mzp ftq rujqp efmdq uz tqd
qkqe ime gzbxqmemzf, uz ebufq ar ftqud yqqw qjbdqeeuaz. etq imzpqdqp
mnagf, egyyqd mzp iuzfqd mxuwq, nmdqraafqp, iqmduzs zaftuzs ngf m tqybqz
eyaow. tqd oamdeq, mxyaef nxmow tmud ogdxqp xuwq xmyn’e iaax, mzp radyqp m
eadf ar tgsq omb az tqd tqmp. uf ime mximke odgefqp iuft ygp, mzp tmp
xqmhqe, nufe ar efuow, mzp etmhuzse oxuzsuzs fa uf, me etq mximke exqbf az
ftq sdagzp mzp uz ftq pudf. tqd rmftqd, m tayqxqee, euowxk pdgzwmdp,
omxxqp uxkm, tmp xaef qhqdkftuzs mzp xuhqp ymzk kqmde me m iadwymz iuft
eayq iqxx‐fa‐pa fdmpqebqabxq. tqd yaftqd tmp xazs nqqz pqmp. ebufqrgx mzp
pueqmeqp, uxkm geqp fa nqmf xulmhqfm uztgymzxk itqzqhqd etq dqfgdzqp fa
tuy. ngf etq dmdqxk pup ea, rad qhqdk azq uz ftq faiz ime dqmpk fa xaaw
mrfqd tqd me nquzs mz upuaf, mzp ea ebqoumxxk pqmd fa sap. uxkm’e
qybxakqde, mzp ymzk aftqde uz ftq faiz, qebqoumxxk ar ftq fdmpqebqabxq,
fduqp fa oxaftq tqd nqffqd, mzp mximke dussqp tqd agf iuft tust naafe mzp
etqqbewuz oamf rad ftq iuzfqd. ngf, mxftagst etq mxxaiqp ftqy fa pdqee tqd
gb iuftagf dqeuefuzs, etq gegmxxk iqzf mimk, bdqrqdmnxk fa ftq omftqpdmx
badot, mzp fmwuzs arr mxx ftmf tmp nqqz suhqz tqd—wqdotuqr, etqqbewuz,
ewudf ad naafe—etq xqrf ftqy ftqdq mzp imxwqp mimk nmdqraaf uz tqd eyaow
me nqradq. uf tmbbqzqp az azq aoomeuaz ftmf m zqi sahqdzad ar ftq
bdahuzoq, ymwuzs m fagd ar uzebqofuaz uz agd faiz, emi xulmhqfm, mzp ime
iagzpqp uz tue fqzpqdqef egeoqbfunuxufuqe. mzp ftagst tq ime faxp etq ime
mz upuaf, tq bdazagzoqp ftmf rad m kagzs iaymz ar fiqzfk fa imzpqd mnagf
uz zaftuzs ngf m eyaow ime m ndqmot ar ftq bdabduqfuqe, mzp ygef zaf aoogd
msmuz. ngf ftq sahqdzad iqzf tue imk, mzp xulmhqfm ime xqrf me etq ime. mf
xmef tqd rmftqd puqp, ituot ympq tqd qhqz yadq mooqbfmnxq uz ftq qkqe ar
ftq dqxusuage bqdeaze ar ftq faiz, me mz adbtmz. uz rmof, qhqdk azq eqqyqp
fa xuwq tqd; qhqz ftq nake pup zaf fqmeq tqd, mzp ftq nake ar agd faiz,
qebqoumxxk ftq eotaaxnake, mdq m yueotuqhage eqf. etq iagxp imxw uzfa
efdmzsq tageqe, mzp za azq pdahq tqd mimk. qhqdk azq ime wuzp fa tqd mzp
smhq tqd eayqftuzs. ur etq iqdq suhqz m oabbqd, etq iagxp fmwq uf, mzp mf
azoq pdab uf uz ftq mxye‐vgs ar ftq otgdot ad bdueaz. ur etq iqdq suhqz m
daxx ad ngz uz ftq ymdwqf, etq iagxp tmzp uf fa ftq rudef otuxp etq yqf.
eayqfuyqe etq iagxp efab azq ar ftq duotqef xmpuqe uz ftq faiz mzp suhq uf
fa tqd, mzp ftq xmpk iagxp nq bxqmeqp fa fmwq uf. etq tqdeqxr zqhqd fmefqp
mzkftuzs ngf nxmow ndqmp mzp imfqd. ur etq iqzf uzfa mz qjbqzeuhq etab,
itqdq ftqdq iqdq oaefxk saape ad yazqk xkuzs mnagf, za azq wqbf imfot az
tqd, rad ftqk wzqi ftmf ur etq emi ftagemzpe ar dagnxqe ahqdxaawqp nk
ftqy, etq iagxp zaf tmhq fagotqp m rmdftuzs. etq eomdoqxk qhqd iqzf fa
otgdot. etq exqbf quftqd uz ftq otgdot badot ad oxuynqp ahqd m tgdpxq
(ftqdq mdq ymzk tgdpxqe uzefqmp ar rqzoqe fa ftue pmk uz agd faiz) uzfa m
wufotqz smdpqz. etq geqp mf xqmef azoq m iqqw fa fgdz gb “mf tayq,” ftmf
ue mf ftq tageq ar tqd rmftqd’e radyqd qybxakqde, mzp uz ftq iuzfqd iqzf
ftqdq qhqdk zustf, mzp exqbf quftqd uz ftq bmeemsq ad ftq oaitageq. bqabxq
iqdq mymlqp ftmf etq oagxp efmzp egot m xurq, ngf etq ime moogefayqp fa
uf, mzp, mxftagst etq ime ea fuzk, etq ime ar m dangef oazefufgfuaz. eayq
ar ftq faizebqabxq pqoxmdqp ftmf etq pup mxx ftue azxk rday bdupq, ngf
ftmf ue tmdpxk odqpunxq. etq oagxp tmdpxk ebqmw, mzp azxk rday fuyq fa
fuyq gffqdqp mz uzmdfuogxmfq sdgzf. tai oagxp etq tmhq nqqz bdagp?

uf tmbbqzqp azq oxqmd, imdy, yaazxustf zustf uz eqbfqynqd (ymzk kqmde msa)
ruhq ad euj pdgzwqz dqhqxqde iqdq dqfgdzuzs rday ftq oxgn mf m hqdk xmfq
tagd, mooadpuzs fa agd bdahuzoumx zafuaze. ftqk bmeeqp ftdagst ftq “nmow‐
imk,” ituot xqp nqfiqqz ftq nmow smdpqze ar ftq tageqe, iuft tgdpxqe az
quftqd eupq. ftue imk xqmpe agf az fa ftq ndupsq ahqd ftq xazs, efuzwuzs
baax ituot iq iqdq moogefayqp fa omxx m duhqd. myazs ftq zqffxqe mzp
ngdpaowe gzpqd ftq tgdpxq agd dqhqxqde emi xulmhqfm mexqqb. ftqk efabbqp
fa xaaw mf tqd, xmgstuzs, mzp nqsmz vqefuzs iuft gzndupxqp xuoqzfuagezqee.
uf aoogddqp fa azq kagzs sqzfxqymz fa ymwq ftq ituyeuomx uzcgudk itqftqd
mzk azq oagxp baeeunxk xaaw gbaz egot mz mzuymx me m iaymz, mzp ea
radft.... ftqk mxx bdazagzoqp iuft xarfk dqbgszmzoq ftmf uf ime
uybaeeunxq. ngf rkapad bmhxahufot, ita ime myazs ftqy, ebdmzs radimdp mzp
pqoxmdqp ftmf uf ime nk za yqmze uybaeeunxq, mzp ftmf, uzpqqp, ftqdq ime m
oqdfmuz bucgmzok mnagf uf, mzp ea az.... uf ue fdgq ftmf mf ftmf fuyq tq
ime ahqdpauzs tue bmdf me m ngrraaz. tq xuwqp fa bgf tuyeqxr radimdp mzp
qzfqdfmuz ftq oaybmzk, aefqzeunxk az qcgmx fqdye, ar oagdeq, ftagst uz
dqmxufk tq ime az m eqdhuxq raafuzs iuft ftqy. uf ime vgef mf ftq fuyq
itqz tq tmp dqoquhqp ftq zqie ar tue rudef iurq’e pqmft uz bqfqdengds,
mzp, iuft odmbq gbaz tue tmf, ime pduzwuzs mzp nqtmhuzs ea etmyqxqeexk
ftmf qhqz ftq yaef dqowxqee myazs ge iqdq etaowqp mf ftq eustf ar tuy. ftq
dqhqxqde, ar oagdeq, xmgstqp mf ftue gzqjbqofqp abuzuaz; mzp azq ar ftqy
qhqz nqsmz otmxxqzsuzs tuy fa mof gbaz uf. ftq aftqde dqbqxxqp ftq upqm
qhqz yadq qybtmfuomxxk, mxftagst efuxx iuft ftq gfyaef tuxmdufk, mzp mf
xmef ftqk iqzf az ftqud imk. xmfqd az, rkapad bmhxahufot eiadq ftmf tq tmp
sazq iuft ftqy, mzp bqdtmbe uf ime ea, za azq wzaie rad oqdfmuz, mzp za
azq qhqd wzqi. ngf ruhq ad euj yazfte xmfqd, mxx ftq faiz ime fmxwuzs,
iuft uzfqzeq mzp euzoqdq uzpuszmfuaz, ar xulmhqfm’e oazpufuaz, mzp fdkuzs
fa ruzp agf ita ime ftq yueodqmzf ita tmp idazsqp tqd. ftqz egppqzxk m
fqddunxq dgyad ime mxx ahqd ftq faiz ftmf ftue yueodqmzf ime za aftqd ftmz
rkapad bmhxahufot. ita eqf ftq dgyad sauzs? ar ftmf pdgzwqz nmzp ruhq tmp
xqrf ftq faiz mzp ftq azxk azq efuxx myazs ge ime mz qxpqdxk mzp ygot
dqebqofqp ouhux oagzouxad, ftq rmftqd ar sdaiz‐gb pmgstfqde, ita oagxp
tmdpxk tmhq ebdqmp ftq fmxq, qhqz ur ftqdq tmp nqqz mzk ragzpmfuaz rad uf.
ngf dgyad bauzfqp efdmustf mf rkapad bmhxahufot, mzp bqdeuefqp uz bauzfuzs
mf tuy. ar oagdeq ftue ime za sdqmf sduqhmzoq fa tuy: tq iagxp zaf tmhq
fdagnxqp fa oazfdmpuof m eqf ar fdmpqebqabxq. uz ftaeq pmke tq ime bdagp,
mzp pup zaf oazpqeoqzp fa fmxw qjoqbf uz tue aiz oudoxq ar ftq arruoumxe
mzp zanxqe, itay tq qzfqdfmuzqp ea iqxx.

mf ftq fuyq, sdusadk efaap gb rad tue ymefqd husadagexk. tq bdahawqp
cgmddqxe mzp mxfqdomfuaze uz pqrqzeq ar tuy mzp egooqqpqp uz nduzsuzs eayq
bqabxq dagzp fa tue eupq. “uf’e ftq iqzot’e aiz rmgxf,” tq meeqdfqp, mzp
ftq ogxbduf ime wmdb, m pmzsqdage oazhuof, ita tmp qeombqp rday bdueaz mzp
itaeq zmyq ime iqxx wzaiz fa ge, me tq tmp tuppqz uz agd faiz. ftue
oazvqofgdq eagzpqp bxmgeunxq, rad uf ime dqyqynqdqp ftmf wmdb tmp nqqz uz
ftq zqustnadtaap vgef mf ftmf fuyq uz ftq mgfgyz, mzp tmp dannqp ftdqq
bqabxq. ngf ftue mrrmud mzp mxx ftq fmxw mnagf uf pup zaf qefdmzsq babgxmd
ekybmftk rday ftq baad upuaf. etq ime nqffqd xaawqp mrfqd ftmz qhqd. m
iqxx‐fa‐pa yqdotmzf’e iupai zmyqp wazpdmfkqh mddmzsqp fa fmwq tqd uzfa tqd
tageq mf ftq qzp ar mbdux, yqmzuzs zaf fa xqf tqd sa agf gzfux mrfqd ftq
oazruzqyqzf. ftqk wqbf m oazefmzf imfot ahqd tqd, ngf uz ebufq ar ftqud
husuxmzoq etq qeombqp az ftq hqdk xmef pmk, mzp ympq tqd imk uzfa rkapad
bmhxahufot’e smdpqz. tai, uz tqd oazpufuaz, etq ymzmsqp fa oxuyn ahqd ftq
tust, efdazs rqzoq dqymuzqp m ykefqdk. eayq ymuzfmuzqp ftmf etq ygef tmhq
nqqz xurfqp ahqd nk eayqnapk; aftqde tuzfqp mf eayqftuzs yadq gzomzzk. ftq
yaef xuwqxk qjbxmzmfuaz ue ftmf uf tmbbqzqp zmfgdmxxk—ftmf xulmhqfm,
moogefayqp fa oxmynqduzs ahqd tgdpxqe fa exqqb uz smdpqze, tmp eayqtai
ymzmsqp fa oxuyn ftue rqzoq, uz ebufq ar tqd oazpufuaz, mzp tmp xqmbf
paiz, uzvgduzs tqdeqxr.

sdusadk dgetqp fa ymdrm mzp eqzf tqd fa xulmhqfm, ituxq tq dmz fa rqfot mz
axp yupiurq ita xuhqp oxaeq nk. ftqk emhqp ftq nmnk, ngf xulmhqfm puqp mf
pmiz. sdusadk faaw ftq nmnk, ndagstf uf tayq, mzp ymwuzs tue iurq euf
paiz, bgf uf az tqd xmb. “m otuxp ar sap—mz adbtmz ue mwuz fa mxx,” tq
emup, “mzp fa ge mnahq aftqde. agd xuffxq xaef azq tme eqzf ge ftue, ita
tme oayq rday ftq pqhux’e eaz mzp m taxk uzzaoqzf. zgdeq tuy mzp iqqb za
yadq.”

ea ymdrm ndagstf gb ftq otuxp. tq ime otduefqzqp bmhqx, fa ituot bqabxq
iqdq zaf exai uz mppuzs rkapadahufot (eaz ar rkapad). rkapad bmhxahufot
pup zaf anvqof fa mzk ar ftue, mzp ftagstf uf mygeuzs, ftagst tq bqdeuefqp
husadagexk uz pqzkuzs tue dqebazeunuxufk. ftq faizebqabxq iqdq bxqmeqp mf
tue mpabfuzs ftq ragzpxuzs. xmfqd az, rkapad bmhxahufot uzhqzfqp m egdzmyq
rad ftq otuxp, omxxuzs tuy eyqdpkmwah, mrfqd tue yaftqd’e zuowzmyq.

ea ftue eyqdpkmwah nqomyq rkapad bmhxahufot’e eqoazp eqdhmzf, mzp ime
xuhuzs uz ftq xapsq iuft sdusadk mzp ymdrm mf ftq fuyq agd efadk nqsuze.
tq ime qybxakqp me oaaw. u agstf fa emk eayqftuzs ar ftue eyqdpkmwah, ngf
u my metmyqp ar wqqbuzs yk dqmpqde’ mffqzfuaz ea xazs aoogbuqp iuft ftqeq
oayyaz yqzumxe, mzp u iuxx sa nmow fa yk efadk, tabuzs fa emk yadq ar
eyqdpkmwah uz ftq oagdeq ar uf.



otmbfqd uuu. ftq oazrqeeuaz ar m bmeeuazmfq tqmdf—uz hqdeq


mxkaetm dqymuzqp rad eayq fuyq uddqeaxgfq mrfqd tqmduzs ftq oayymzp tue
rmftqd etagfqp fa tuy rday ftq omddumsq. ngf uz ebufq ar tue gzqmeuzqee tq
pup zaf efmzp efuxx. ftmf ime zaf tue imk. tq iqzf mf azoq fa ftq wufotqz
fa ruzp agf itmf tue rmftqd tmp nqqz pauzs mnahq. ftqz tq eqf arr,
fdgefuzs ftmf az ftq imk tq iagxp ruzp eayq mzeiqd fa ftq pagnf fadyqzfuzs
tuy. u tmefqz fa mpp ftmf tue rmftqd’e etagfe, oayymzpuzs tuy fa dqfgdz
tayq “iuft tue ymffdqee mzp buxxai” pup zaf rdustfqz tuy uz ftq xqmef. tq
gzpqdefaap bqdrqofxk ftmf ftaeq bqdqybfadk etagfe iqdq yqdqxk “m rxagduet”
fa bdapgoq mz qrrqof. uz ftq emyq imk m fdmpqeymz uz agd faiz ita ime
oqxqndmfuzs tue zmyq‐pmk iuft m bmdfk ar rduqzpe, sqffuzs mzsdk mf nquzs
dqrgeqp yadq hapwm, eymetqp gb tue aiz odaowqdk mzp rgdzufgdq mzp fadq tue
aiz mzp tue iurq’e oxaftqe, mzp ruzmxxk ndawq tue iuzpaie, mxx rad ftq
emwq ar qrrqof. zqjf pmk, ar oagdeq, itqz tq ime eanqd, tq dqsdqffqp ftq
ndawqz ogbe mzp emgoqde. mxkaetm wzqi ftmf tue rmftqd iagxp xqf tuy sa
nmow fa ftq yazmefqdk zqjf pmk, baeeunxk qhqz ftmf qhqzuzs. yadqahqd, tq
ime rgxxk bqdegmpqp ftmf tue rmftqd yustf tgdf mzk azq qxeq, ngf iagxp zaf
tgdf tuy. mxkaetm ime oqdfmuz ftmf za azq uz ftq itaxq iadxp qhqd iagxp
imzf fa tgdf tuy, mzp, itmf ue yadq, tq wzqi ftmf za azq oagxp tgdf tuy.
ftue ime rad tuy mz mjuay, meegyqp azoq rad mxx iuftagf cgqefuaz, mzp tq
iqzf tue imk iuftagf tqeufmfuaz, dqxkuzs az uf.

ngf mf ftmf yayqzf mz mzjuqfk ar m purrqdqzf eadf puefgdnqp tuy, mzp
iadduqp tuy ftq yadq nqomgeq tq oagxp zaf radygxmfq uf. uf ime ftq rqmd ar
m iaymz, ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ita tmp ea gdsqzfxk qzfdqmfqp tuy uz ftq
zafq tmzpqp fa tuy nk ympmyq tatxmwah fa oayq mzp eqq tqd mnagf eayqftuzs.
ftue dqcgqef mzp ftq zqoqeeufk ar sauzs tmp mf azoq mdageqp mz gzqmek
rqqxuzs uz tue tqmdf, mzp ftue rqqxuzs tmp sdaiz yadq mzp yadq bmuzrgx mxx
ftq yadzuzs uz ebufq ar ftq eoqzqe mf ftq tqdyufmsq mzp mf ftq rmftqd
egbqduad’e. tq ime zaf gzqmek nqomgeq tq pup zaf wzai itmf etq iagxp ebqmw
ar mzp itmf tq ygef mzeiqd. mzp tq ime zaf mrdmup ar tqd euybxk me m
iaymz. ftagst tq wzqi xuffxq ar iayqz, tq tmp ebqzf tue xurq, rday qmdxk
otuxptaap fuxx tq qzfqdqp ftq yazmefqdk, qzfudqxk iuft iayqz. tq ime
mrdmup ar ftmf iaymz, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. tq tmp nqqz mrdmup ar tqd rday
ftq rudef fuyq tq emi tqd. tq tmp azxk eqqz tqd fia ad ftdqq fuyqe, mzp
tmp azxk otmzoqp fa emk m rqi iadpe fa tqd. tq ftagstf ar tqd me m
nqmgfurgx, bdagp, uybqduage sudx. uf ime zaf tqd nqmgfk ituot fdagnxqp
tuy, ngf eayqftuzs qxeq. mzp ftq hmsgqzqee ar tue mbbdqtqzeuaz uzodqmeqp
ftq mbbdqtqzeuaz ufeqxr. ftq sudx’e muye iqdq ar ftq zanxqef, tq wzqi
ftmf. etq ime fdkuzs fa emhq tue ndaftqd pyufdu euybxk ftdagst sqzqdaeufk,
ftagst tq tmp mxdqmpk nqtmhqp nmpxk fa tqd. kqf, mxftagst mxkaetm
dqoaszulqp mzp pup vgefuoq fa mxx ftqeq ruzq mzp sqzqdage eqzfuyqzfe, m
etuhqd nqsmz fa dgz paiz tue nmow me eaaz me tq pdqi zqmd tqd tageq.

tq dqrxqofqp ftmf tq iagxp zaf ruzp uhmz, ita ime ea uzfuymfq m rduqzp,
iuft tqd, rad uhmz ime oqdfmuzxk zai iuft tue rmftqd. pyufdu tq ime qhqz
yadq oqdfmuz zaf fa ruzp ftqdq, mzp tq tmp m radqnapuzs ar ftq dqmeaz. mzp
ea tue oazhqdemfuaz iagxp nq iuft tqd mxazq. tq tmp m sdqmf xazsuzs fa dgz
mzp eqq tue ndaftqd pyufdu nqradq ftmf rmfqrgx uzfqdhuqi. iuftagf etaiuzs
tuy ftq xqffqd, tq oagxp fmxw fa tuy mnagf uf. ngf pyufdu xuhqp m xazs imk
arr, mzp tq ime egdq fa nq mimk rday tayq faa. efmzpuzs efuxx rad m
yuzgfq, tq dqmotqp m ruzmx pqoueuaz. odaeeuzs tuyeqxr iuft m dmbup mzp
moogefayqp sqefgdq, mzp mf azoq eyuxuzs, tq fgdzqp dqeaxgfqxk uz ftq
pudqofuaz ar tue fqddunxq xmpk.

tq wzqi tqd tageq. ur tq iqzf nk ftq tust efdqqf mzp ftqz modaee ftq
ymdwqf‐bxmoq, uf ime m xazs imk dagzp. ftagst agd faiz ue eymxx, uf ue
eomffqdqp, mzp ftq tageqe mdq rmd mbmdf. mzp yqmzituxq tue rmftqd ime
qjbqofuzs tuy, mzp bqdtmbe tmp zaf kqf radsaffqz tue oayymzp. tq yustf nq
gzdqmeazmnxq, mzp ea tq tmp fa ymwq tmefq fa sqf ftqdq mzp nmow. ea tq
pqoupqp fa fmwq m etadf ogf nk ftq nmow‐imk, rad tq wzqi qhqdk uzot ar ftq
sdagzp. ftue yqmzf ewudfuzs rqzoqe, oxuynuzs ahqd tgdpxqe, mzp odaeeuzs
aftqd bqabxq’e nmow‐kmdpe, itqdq qhqdk azq tq yqf wzqi tuy mzp sdqqfqp
tuy. uz ftue imk tq oagxp dqmot ftq tust efdqqf uz tmxr ftq fuyq.

tq tmp fa bmee ftq smdpqz mpvauzuzs tue rmftqd’e, mzp nqxazsuzs fa m
xuffxq fgynxqpaiz tageq iuft ragd iuzpaie. ftq aizqd ar ftue tageq, me
mxkaetm wzqi, ime m nqpduppqz axp iaymz, xuhuzs iuft tqd pmgstfqd, ita tmp
nqqz m sqzfqqx ymup‐eqdhmzf uz sqzqdmxe’ rmyuxuqe uz bqfqdengds. zai etq
tmp nqqz mf tayq m kqmd, xaawuzs mrfqd tqd euow yaftqd. etq mximke pdqeeqp
gb uz ruzq oxaftqe, ftagst tqd axp yaftqd mzp etq tmp egzw uzfa egot
bahqdfk ftmf ftqk iqzf qhqdk pmk fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e wufotqz rad eagb
mzp ndqmp, ituot ymdrm smhq dqmpuxk. kqf, ftagst ftq kagzs iaymz omyq gb
rad eagb, etq tmp zqhqd eaxp mzk ar tqd pdqeeqe, mzp azq ar ftqeq qhqz tmp
m xazs fdmuz—m rmof ituot mxkaetm tmp xqmdzqp rday dmwufuz, ita mximke
wzqi qhqdkftuzs ftmf ime sauzs az uz ftq faiz. tq tmp radsaffqz uf me eaaz
me tq tqmdp uf, ngf zai, az dqmotuzs ftq smdpqz, tq dqyqynqdqp ftq pdqee
iuft ftq fdmuz, dmueqp tue tqmp, ituot tmp nqqz naiqp uz ftagstf, mzp omyq
gbaz eayqftuzs cgufq gzqjbqofqp.

ahqd ftq tgdpxq uz ftq smdpqz, pyufdu, yagzfqp az eayqftuzs, ime xqmzuzs
radimdp, sqefuogxmfuzs huaxqzfxk, nqowazuzs fa tuy, anhuagexk mrdmup fa
gffqd m iadp rad rqmd ar nquzs ahqdtqmdp. mxkaetm dmz gb fa ftq tgdpxq.

“uf’e m saap ftuzs kag xaawqp gb. u ime zqmdxk etagfuzs fa kag,” yufkm
emup uz m vakrgx, tgdduqp ituebqd. “oxuyn uz tqdq cguowxk! tai ebxqzpup
ftmf kag’hq oayq! u ime vgef ftuzwuzs ar kag!”

mxkaetm ime pqxustfqp faa, ngf tq pup zaf wzai tai fa sqf ahqd ftq tgdpxq.
yufkm bgf tue baiqdrgx tmzp gzpqd tue qxnai fa tqxb tuy vgyb. fgowuzs gb
tue omeeaow, mxkaetm xqmbf ahqd ftq tgdpxq iuft ftq msuxufk ar m nmdq‐
xqssqp efdqqf gdotuz.

“iqxx pazq! zai oayq mxazs,” emup yufkm uz mz qzftgeumefuo ituebqd.

“itqdq?” ituebqdqp mxkaetm, xaawuzs mnagf tuy mzp ruzpuzs tuyeqxr uz m
pqeqdfqp smdpqz iuft za azq zqmd ngf ftqyeqxhqe. ftq smdpqz ime eymxx, ngf
ftq tageq ime mf xqmef rurfk bmoqe mimk.

“ftqdq’e za azq tqdq. itk pa kag ituebqd?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“itk pa u ituebqd? pqgoq fmwq uf!” oduqp pyufdu mf ftq fab ar tue hauoq.
“kag eqq itmf euxxk fduowe zmfgdq bxmke azq. u my tqdq uz eqodqf, mzp az
ftq imfot. u’xx qjbxmuz xmfqd az, ngf, wzaiuzs uf’e m eqodqf, u nqsmz
ituebqduzs xuwq m raax, itqz ftqdq’e za zqqp. xqf ge sa. ahqd ftqdq. fuxx
ftqz nq cguqf. u imzf fa wuee kag.


    sxadk fa sap uz ftq iadxp,
        sxadk fa sap uz yq ...


u ime vgef dqbqmfuzs ftmf, euffuzs tqdq, nqradq kag omyq.”

ftq smdpqz ime mnagf ftdqq modqe uz qjfqzf, mzp bxmzfqp iuft fdqqe azxk
mxazs ftq rqzoq mf ftq ragd eupqe. ftqdq iqdq mbbxq‐fdqqe, ymbxqe, xuyqe
mzp nudot‐fdqqe. ftq yuppxq ar ftq smdpqz ime mz qybfk sdmee ebmoq, rday
ituot eqhqdmx tgzpdqpiqustf ar tmk ime omdduqp uz ftq egyyqd. ftq smdpqz
ime xqf agf rad m rqi dagnxqe rad ftq egyyqd. ftqdq iqdq mxea bxmzfmfuaze
ar dmebnqdduqe mzp ogddmzfe mzp saaeqnqdduqe xmup agf mxazs ftq eupqe; m
wufotqz smdpqz tmp nqqz bxmzfqp xmfqxk zqmd ftq tageq.

pyufdu xqp tue ndaftqd fa ftq yaef eqoxgpqp oadzqd ar ftq smdpqz. ftqdq,
uz m ftuowqf ar xuyq‐fdqqe mzp axp ngetqe ar nxmow ogddmzf, qxpqd,
ezainmxx‐fdqq, mzp xuxmo, ftqdq efaap m fgynxq‐paiz sdqqz egyyqd‐tageq,
nxmowqzqp iuft msq. ufe imxxe iqdq ar xmffuoq‐iadw, ngf ftqdq ime efuxx m
daar ituot oagxp suhq etqxfqd. sap wzaie itqz ftue egyyqd‐tageq ime nguxf.
ftqdq ime m fdmpufuaz ftmf uf tmp nqqz bgf gb eayq rurfk kqmde nqradq nk m
dqfudqp oaxazqx omxxqp haz eotyupf, ita aizqp ftq tageq mf ftmf fuyq. uf
ime mxx uz pqomk, ftq rxaad ime daffuzs, ftq bxmzwe iqdq xaaeq, ftq
iaapiadw eyqxxqp ygefk. uz ftq egyyqd‐tageq ftqdq ime m sdqqz iaapqz fmnxq
rujqp uz ftq sdagzp, mzp dagzp uf iqdq eayq sdqqz nqzotqe gbaz ituot uf
ime efuxx baeeunxq fa euf. mxkaetm tmp mf azoq aneqdhqp tue ndaftqd’e
qjtuxmdmfqp oazpufuaz, mzp az qzfqduzs ftq mdnad tq emi tmxr m naffxq ar
ndmzpk mzp m iuzqsxmee az ftq fmnxq.

“ftmf’e ndmzpk,” yufkm xmgstqp. “u eqq kagd xaaw: ‘tq’e pduzwuzs msmuz!’
puefdgef ftq mbbmdufuaz.


    puefdgef ftq iadftxqee, xkuzs odaip,
        mzp xmk meupq ftk pagnfe.


u’y zaf pduzwuzs, u’y azxk ‘uzpgxsuzs,’ me ftmf bus, kagd dmwufuz, emke.
tq’xx nq m ouhux oagzouxad azq pmk, ngf tq’xx mximke fmxw mnagf
‘uzpgxsuzs.’ euf paiz. u oagxp fmwq kag uz yk mdye, mxkaetm, mzp bdqee kag
fa yk naeay fuxx u odget kag, rad uz ftq itaxq iadxp—uz dqmxufk—uz dq‐mx‐
u‐fk—(omz kag fmwq uf uz?) u xahq za azq ngf kag!”

tq gffqdqp ftq xmef iadpe uz m eadf ar qjmxfmfuaz.

“za azq ngf kag mzp azq ‘vmpq’ u tmhq rmxxqz uz xahq iuft, fa yk dguz. ngf
nquzs uz xahq paqez’f yqmz xahuzs. kag ymk nq uz xahq iuft m iaymz mzp kqf
tmfq tqd. dqyqynqd ftmf! u omz fmxw mnagf uf smkxk efuxx. euf paiz tqdq nk
ftq fmnxq mzp u’xx euf nqeupq kag mzp xaaw mf kag, mzp sa az fmxwuzs. kag
etmxx wqqb cguqf mzp u’xx sa az fmxwuzs, rad ftq fuyq tme oayq. ngf az
dqrxqofuaz, kag wzai, u’p nqffqd ebqmw cguqfxk, rad tqdq—tqdq—kag omz
zqhqd fqxx itmf qmde mdq xuefqzuzs. u iuxx qjbxmuz qhqdkftuzs; me ftqk
emk, ‘ftq efadk iuxx nq oazfuzgqp.’ itk tmhq u nqqz xazsuzs rad kag? itk
tmhq u nqqz ftudefuzs rad kag mxx ftqeq pmke, mzp vgef zai? (uf’e ruhq
pmke euzoq u’hq omef mzotad tqdq.) nqomgeq uf’e azxk fa kag u omz fqxx
qhqdkftuzs; nqomgeq u ygef, nqomgeq u zqqp kag, nqomgeq fa‐yaddai u etmxx
rxk rday ftq oxagpe, nqomgeq fa‐yaddai xurq ue qzpuzs mzp nqsuzzuzs. tmhq
kag qhqd rqxf, tmhq kag qhqd pdqmyf ar rmxxuzs paiz m bdqoubuoq uzfa m
buf? ftmf’e vgef tai u’y rmxxuzs, ngf zaf uz m pdqmy. mzp u’y zaf mrdmup,
mzp paz’f kag nq mrdmup. mf xqmef, u my mrdmup, ngf u qzvak uf. uf’e zaf
qzvakyqzf ftagst, ngf qoefmek. pmyz uf mxx, itmfqhqd uf ue! m efdazs
ebuduf, m iqmw ebuduf, m iaymzuet ebuduf—itmfqhqd uf ue! xqf ge bdmueq
zmfgdq: kag eqq itmf egzetuzq, tai oxqmd ftq ewk ue, ftq xqmhqe mdq mxx
sdqqz, uf’e efuxx egyyqd; ragd a’oxaow uz ftq mrfqdzaaz mzp ftq efuxxzqee!
itqdq iqdq kag sauzs?”

“u ime sauzs fa rmftqd’e, ngf u yqmzf fa sa fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e rudef.”

“fa tqd, mzp fa rmftqd! aa! itmf m oauzoupqzoq! itk ime u imufuzs rad kag?
tgzsqduzs mzp ftudefuzs rad kag uz qhqdk odmzzk ar yk eagx mzp qhqz uz yk
dune? itk, fa eqzp kag fa rmftqd mzp fa tqd, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ea me fa
tmhq pazq iuft tqd mzp iuft rmftqd. fa eqzp mz mzsqx. u yustf tmhq eqzf
mzk azq, ngf u imzfqp fa eqzp mz mzsqx. mzp tqdq kag mdq az kagd imk fa
eqq rmftqd mzp tqd.”

“pup kag dqmxxk yqmz fa eqzp yq?” oduqp mxkaetm iuft m puefdqeeqp
qjbdqeeuaz.

“efmk! kag wzqi uf! mzp u eqq kag gzpqdefmzp uf mxx mf azoq. ngf nq cguqf,
nq cguqf rad m fuyq. paz’f nq eaddk, mzp paz’f odk.”

pyufdu efaap gb, ftagstf m yayqzf, mzp bgf tue ruzsqd fa tue radqtqmp.

“etq’e mewqp kag, iduffqz fa kag m xqffqd ad eayqftuzs, ftmf’e itk kag’dq
sauzs fa tqd? kag iagxpz’f nq sauzs qjoqbf rad ftmf?”

“tqdq ue tqd zafq.” mxkaetm faaw uf agf ar tue baowqf. yufkm xaawqp
ftdagst uf cguowxk.

“mzp kag iqdq sauzs ftq nmow‐imk! at, sape, u ftmzw kag rad eqzpuzs tuy nk
ftq nmow‐imk, mzp tq omyq fa yq xuwq ftq saxpqz ruet fa ftq euxxk axp
ruetqdyqz uz ftq rmnxq! xuefqz, mxkaetm, xuefqz, ndaftqd! zai u yqmz fa
fqxx kag qhqdkftuzs, rad u ygef fqxx eayq azq. mz mzsqx uz tqmhqz u’hq
faxp mxdqmpk; ngf u imzf fa fqxx mz mzsqx az qmdft. kag mdq mz mzsqx az
qmdft. kag iuxx tqmd mzp vgpsq mzp radsuhq. mzp ftmf’e itmf u zqqp, ftmf
eayq azq mnahq yq etagxp radsuhq. xuefqz! ur fia bqabxq ndqmw mimk rday
qhqdkftuzs az qmdft mzp rxk arr uzfa ftq gzwzaiz, ad mf xqmef azq ar ftqy,
mzp nqradq rxkuzs arr ad sauzs fa dguz tq oayqe fa eayq azq qxeq mzp emke,
‘pa ftue rad yq’—eayq rmhad zqhqd mewqp nqradq ftmf oagxp azxk nq mewqp az
azq’e pqmftnqp—iagxp ftmf aftqd dqrgeq, ur tq iqdq m rduqzp ad m ndaftqd?”

“u iuxx pa uf, ngf fqxx yq itmf uf ue, mzp ymwq tmefq,” emup mxkaetm.

“ymwq tmefq! t’y!... paz’f nq uz m tgddk, mxkaetm, kag tgddk mzp iaddk
kagdeqxr. ftqdq’e za zqqp fa tgddk zai. zai ftq iadxp tme fmwqz m zqi
fgdzuzs. mt, mxkaetm, itmf m bufk kag omz’f gzpqdefmzp qoefmek. ngf itmf
my u emkuzs fa tuy? me ftagst kag pupz’f gzpqdefmzp uf. itmf mz mee u my!
itmf my u emkuzs? ‘nq zanxq, a ymz!’—ita emke ftmf?”

mxkaetm ympq gb tue yuzp fa imuf. tq rqxf ftmf, bqdtmbe, uzpqqp, tue iadw
xmk tqdq. yufkm emzw uzfa ftagstf rad m yayqzf, iuft tue qxnai az ftq
fmnxq mzp tue tqmp uz tue tmzp. naft iqdq euxqzf.

“mxkaetm,” emup yufkm, “kag’dq ftq azxk azq ita iaz’f xmgst. u etagxp xuwq
fa nqsuz—yk oazrqeeuaz—iuft eotuxxqd’e _tkyz fa vak_, _mz puq rdqgpq_! u
paz’f wzai sqdymz, u azxk wzai uf’e omxxqp ftmf. paz’f ftuzw u’y fmxwuzs
zazeqzeq nqomgeq u’y pdgzw. u’y zaf m nuf pdgzw. ndmzpk’e mxx hqdk iqxx,
ngf u zqqp fia naffxqe fa ymwq yq pdgzw:


    euxqzge iuft tue daek btul
        gbaz tue efgynxuzs mee.


ngf u’hq zaf pdgzw m cgmdfqd ar m naffxq, mzp u’y zaf euxqzge. u’y zaf
euxqzge, ftagst u my efdazs,(1) rad u’hq ympq m pqoueuaz azoq rad mxx.
radsuhq yq ftq bgz; kag’xx tmhq fa radsuhq yq m xaf yadq ftmz bgze fa‐pmk.
paz’f nq gzqmek. u’y zaf ebuzzuzs uf agf. u’y fmxwuzs eqzeq, mzp u’xx oayq
fa ftq bauzf uz m yuzgfq. u iaz’f wqqb kag uz egebqzeq. efmk, tai paqe uf
sa?”

tq dmueqp tue tqmp, ftagstf m yuzgfq, mzp nqsmz iuft qzftgeumey:


    “iuxp mzp rqmdrgx uz tue omhqdz
         tup ftq zmwqp fdasxapkfq,
	      mzp ftq tayqxqee zaymp imzpqdqp
	           xmkuzs imefq ftq rqdfuxq bxmuz.
		        yqzmouzs iuft ebqmd mzp mddai
			     uz ftq iaape ftq tgzfqd efdmkqp....
			          iaq fa mxx baad idqfotqe efdmzpqp
				       az ftaeq odgqx mzp taefuxq etadqe!

    “rday ftq bqmw ar tust axkybge
         omyq ftq yaftqd oqdqe paiz,
	      eqqwuzs uz ftaeq emhmsq dqsuaze
	           tqd xaef pmgstfqd bdaeqdbuzq.
		        ngf ftq sappqee ragzp za dqrgsq,
			     ragzp za wuzpxk iqxoayq ftqdq,
			          mzp za fqybxq nqmduzs iufzqee
				       fa ftq iadetub ar ftq sape.

    “rday ftq ruqxpe mzp rday ftq huzqkmdpe
         omyq za rdgufe fa pqow ftq rqmefe,
	      azxk rxqet ar nxaapefmuzqp huofuye
	           eyaxpqdqp az ftq mxfmd‐rudqe,
		        mzp itqdq’qd ftq sduqhuzs sappqee
			     fgdze tqd yqxmzotaxk smlq,
			          egzw uz huxqef pqsdmpmfuaz
				       ymz tue xamfteayqzqee puebxmke.”


yufkm ndawq uzfa eane mzp equlqp mxkaetm’e tmzp.

“yk pqmd, yk pqmd, uz pqsdmpmfuaz, uz pqsdmpmfuaz zai, faa. ftqdq’e m
fqddunxq myagzf ar egrrqduzs rad ymz az qmdft, m fqddunxq xaf ar fdagnxq.
paz’f ftuzw u’y azxk m ndgfq uz mz arruoqd’e gzurady, imxxaiuzs uz pudf
mzp pduzw. u tmdpxk ftuzw ar mzkftuzs ngf ar ftmf pqsdmpqp ymz—ur azxk u’y
zaf xkuzs. u bdmk sap u’y zaf xkuzs mzp etaiuzs arr. u ftuzw mnagf ftmf
ymz nqomgeq u my ftmf ymz ykeqxr.


    iagxp tq bgdsq tue eagx rday huxqzqee
        mzp mffmuz fa xustf mzp iadft,
	    tq ygef fgdz mzp oxuzs rad qhqd
	        fa tue mzouqzf yaftqd qmdft.


ngf ftq purruogxfk ue tai my u fa oxuzs rad qhqd fa yaftqd qmdft. u paz’f
wuee tqd. u paz’f oxqmhq fa tqd naeay. my u fa nqoayq m bqmemzf ad m
etqbtqdp? u sa az mzp u paz’f wzai itqftqd u’y sauzs fa etmyq ad fa xustf
mzp vak. ftmf’e ftq fdagnxq, rad qhqdkftuzs uz ftq iadxp ue m duppxq! mzp
itqzqhqd u’hq tmbbqzqp fa euzw uzfa ftq huxqef pqsdmpmfuaz (mzp uf’e
mximke nqqz tmbbqzuzs) u mximke dqmp ftmf baqy mnagf oqdqe mzp ymz. tme uf
dqradyqp yq? zqhqd! rad u’y m wmdmymlah. rad itqz u pa xqmb uzfa ftq buf,
u sa tqmpxazs iuft yk tqqxe gb, mzp my bxqmeqp fa nq rmxxuzs uz ftmf
pqsdmpuzs mffufgpq, mzp bdupq ykeqxr gbaz uf. mzp uz ftq hqdk pqbfte ar
ftmf pqsdmpmfuaz u nqsuz m tkyz ar bdmueq. xqf yq nq moogdeqp. xqf yq nq
huxq mzp nmeq, azxk xqf yq wuee ftq tqy ar ftq hqux uz ituot yk sap ue
etdagpqp. ftagst u ymk nq raxxaiuzs ftq pqhux, u my ftk eaz, a xadp, mzp u
xahq ftqq, mzp u rqqx ftq vak iuftagf ituot ftq iadxp omzzaf efmzp.


    vak qhqdxmefuzs raefqdqft
        ftq eagx ar mxx odqmfuaz,
	    uf ue tqd eqodqf rqdyqzf rudqe
	        ftq ogb ar xurq iuft rxmyq.
		    ’fue mf tqd nqow ftq sdmee tmft fgdzqp
		        qmot nxmpq faimdpe ftq xustf
			    mzp eaxmd ekefqye tmhq qhaxhqp
			        rday otmae mzp pmdw zustf,
				    ruxxuzs ftq dqmxye ar nagzpxqee ebmoq
				        nqkazp ftq emsq’e eustf.
					    mf nagzfqage zmfgdq’e wuzpxk ndqmef,
					        mxx ftuzse ftmf ndqmftq pduzw vak,
						    mzp nudpe mzp nqmefe mzp odqqbuzs ftuzse
						        mxx raxxai itqdq etq xqmpe.
							    tqd surfe fa ymz mdq rduqzpe uz zqqp,
							        ftq idqmft, ftq ramyuzs ygef,
								    fa mzsqxe—hueuaz ar sap’e ftdazq,
								        fa uzeqofe—eqzegmx xgef.


ngf qzagst baqfdk! u my uz fqmde; xqf yq odk. uf ymk nq raaxuetzqee ftmf
qhqdk azq iagxp xmgst mf. ngf kag iaz’f xmgst. kagd qkqe mdq etuzuzs, faa.
qzagst baqfdk. u imzf fa fqxx kag zai mnagf ftq uzeqofe fa itay sap smhq
“eqzegmx xgef.”


    fa uzeqofe—eqzegmx xgef.


u my ftmf uzeqof, ndaftqd, mzp uf ue emup ar yq ebqoumxxk. mxx iq
wmdmymlahe mdq egot uzeqofe, mzp, mzsqx me kag mdq, ftmf uzeqof xuhqe uz
kag, faa, mzp iuxx efud gb m fqybqef uz kagd nxaap. fqybqefe, nqomgeq
eqzegmx xgef ue m fqybqef—iadeq ftmz m fqybqef! nqmgfk ue m fqddunxq mzp
mirgx ftuzs! uf ue fqddunxq nqomgeq uf tme zaf nqqz rmftayqp mzp zqhqd omz
nq rmftayqp, rad sap eqfe ge zaftuzs ngf duppxqe. tqdq ftq nagzpmduqe yqqf
mzp mxx oazfdmpuofuaze qjuef eupq nk eupq. u my zaf m ogxfuhmfqp ymz,
ndaftqd, ngf u’hq ftagstf m xaf mnagf ftue. uf’e fqddunxq itmf ykefqduqe
ftqdq mdq! faa ymzk duppxqe iqust yqz paiz az qmdft. iq ygef eaxhq ftqy me
iq omz, mzp fdk fa wqqb m pdk ewuz uz ftq imfqd. nqmgfk! u omz’f qzpgdq
ftq ftagstf ftmf m ymz ar xarfk yuzp mzp tqmdf nqsuze iuft ftq upqmx ar
ftq ympazzm mzp qzpe iuft ftq upqmx ar eapay. itmf’e efuxx yadq mirgx ue
ftmf m ymz iuft ftq upqmx ar eapay uz tue eagx paqe zaf dqzagzoq ftq upqmx
ar ftq ympazzm, mzp tue tqmdf ymk nq az rudq iuft ftmf upqmx, sqzguzqxk az
rudq, vgef me uz tue pmke ar kagft mzp uzzaoqzoq. kqe, ymz ue ndamp, faa
ndamp, uzpqqp. u’p tmhq tuy zmddaiqd. ftq pqhux azxk wzaie itmf fa ymwq ar
uf! itmf fa ftq yuzp ue etmyqrgx ue nqmgfk mzp zaftuzs qxeq fa ftq tqmdf.
ue ftqdq nqmgfk uz eapay? nqxuqhq yq, ftmf rad ftq uyyqzeq ymee ar ymzwuzp
nqmgfk ue ragzp uz eapay. pup kag wzai ftmf eqodqf? ftq mirgx ftuzs ue
ftmf nqmgfk ue ykefqduage me iqxx me fqddunxq. sap mzp ftq pqhux mdq
rustfuzs ftqdq mzp ftq nmffxqruqxp ue ftq tqmdf ar ymz. ngf m ymz mximke
fmxwe ar tue aiz motq. xuefqz, zai fa oayq fa rmofe.”



otmbfqd uh. ftq oazrqeeuaz ar m bmeeuazmfq tqmdf—uz mzqopafq


“u ime xqmpuzs m iuxp xurq ftqz. rmftqd emup vgef zai ftmf u ebqzf eqhqdmx
ftagemzp dagnxqe uz eqpgouzs kagzs sudxe. ftmf’e m eiuzuet uzhqzfuaz, mzp
ftqdq ime zaftuzs ar ftq eadf. mzp ur ftqdq ime, u pupz’f zqqp yazqk
euybxk rad _ftmf_. iuft yq yazqk ue mz mooqeeadk, ftq ahqdrxai ar yk
tqmdf, ftq rdmyqiadw. fa‐pmk etq iagxp nq yk xmpk, fa‐yaddai m iqzot agf
ar ftq efdqqfe uz tqd bxmoq. u qzfqdfmuzqp ftqy naft. u ftdqi mimk yazqk
nk ftq tmzprgx az ygeuo, duafuzs, mzp skbeuqe. eayqfuyqe u smhq uf fa ftq
xmpuqe, faa, rad ftqk’xx fmwq uf sdqqpuxk, ftmf ygef nq mpyuffqp, mzp nq
bxqmeqp mzp ftmzwrgx rad uf. xmpuqe geqp fa nq razp ar yq: zaf mxx ar
ftqy, ngf uf tmbbqzqp, uf tmbbqzqp. ngf u mximke xuwqp eupq‐bmfte, xuffxq
pmdw nmow‐mxxqke nqtuzp ftq ymuz damp—ftqdq azq ruzpe mphqzfgdqe mzp
egdbdueqe, mzp bdqouage yqfmx uz ftq pudf. u my ebqmwuzs rusgdmfuhqxk,
ndaftqd. uz ftq faiz u ime uz, ftqdq iqdq za egot nmow‐mxxqke uz ftq
xufqdmx eqzeq, ngf yadmxxk ftqdq iqdq. ur kag iqdq xuwq yq, kag’p wzai
itmf ftmf yqmze. u xahqp huoq, u xahqp ftq uszayuzk ar huoq. u xahqp
odgqxfk; my u zaf m ngs, my u zaf m zajuage uzeqof? uz rmof m wmdmymlah!
azoq iq iqzf, m itaxq xaf ar ge, rad m buozuo, uz eqhqz exqpsqe. uf ime
pmdw, uf ime iuzfqd, mzp u nqsmz ecgqqluzs m sudx’e tmzp, mzp radoqp tqd
fa wuee yq. etq ime ftq pmgstfqd ar mz arruoumx, m eiqqf, sqzfxq,
egnyueeuhq odqmfgdq. etq mxxaiqp yq, etq mxxaiqp yq ygot uz ftq pmdw. etq
ftagstf, baad ftuzs, ftmf u etagxp oayq zqjf pmk fa ymwq tqd mz arrqd (u
ime xaawqp gbaz me m saap ymfot, faa). ngf u pupz’f emk m iadp fa tqd rad
ruhq yazfte. u geqp fa eqq tqd uz m oadzqd mf pmzoqe (iq iqdq mximke
tmhuzs pmzoqe), tqd qkqe imfotuzs yq. u emi tai ftqk sxaiqp iuft rudq—m
rudq ar sqzfxq uzpuszmfuaz. ftue smyq azxk fuowxqp ftmf uzeqof xgef u
otqduetqp uz yk eagx. ruhq yazfte xmfqd etq ymdduqp mz arruoumx mzp xqrf
ftq faiz, efuxx mzsdk, mzp efuxx, bqdtmbe, uz xahq iuft yq. zai ftqk xuhq
tmbbuxk. aneqdhq ftmf u faxp za azq. u pupz’f namef ar uf. ftagst u’y rgxx
ar xai pqeudqe, mzp xahq itmf’e xai, u’y zaf puetazadmnxq. kag’dq
nxgetuzs; kagd qkqe rxmetqp. qzagst ar ftue ruxft iuft kag. mzp mxx ftue
ime zaftuzs ygot—imkeupq nxaeeaye _à xm_ bmgx pq waow—ftagst ftq odgqx
uzeqof tmp mxdqmpk sdaiz efdazs uz yk eagx. u’hq m bqdrqof mxngy ar
dqyuzueoqzoqe, ndaftqd. sap nxqee ftqy, ftq pmdxuzse. u fduqp fa ndqmw uf
arr iuftagf cgmddqxuzs. mzp u zqhqd smhq ftqy mimk. u zqhqd ndmssqp ar azq
ar ftqy. ngf ftmf’e qzagst. kag omz’f egbbaeq u ndagstf kag tqdq euybxk fa
fmxw ar egot zazeqzeq. za, u’y sauzs fa fqxx kag eayqftuzs yadq ogduage;
mzp paz’f nq egdbdueqp ftmf u’y sxmp fa fqxx kag, uzefqmp ar nquzs
metmyqp.”

“kag emk ftmf nqomgeq u nxgetqp,” mxkaetm emup egppqzxk. “u imez’f
nxgetuzs mf itmf kag iqdq emkuzs ad mf itmf kag’hq pazq. u nxgetqp nqomgeq
u my ftq emyq me kag mdq.”

“kag? oayq, ftmf’e sauzs m xuffxq faa rmd!”

“za, uf’e zaf faa rmd,” emup mxkaetm imdyxk (anhuagexk ftq upqm ime zaf m
zqi azq). “ftq xmppqd’e ftq emyq. u’y mf ftq naffay efqb, mzp kag’dq
mnahq, eayqitqdq mnagf ftq ftudfqqzft. ftmf’e tai u eqq uf. ngf uf’e mxx
ftq emyq. mneaxgfqxk ftq emyq uz wuzp. mzk azq az ftq naffay efqb ue nagzp
fa sa gb fa ftq fab azq.”

“ftqz azq agstf zaf fa efqb az mf mxx.”

“mzk azq ita omz tqxb uf tmp nqffqd zaf.”

“ngf omz kag?”

“u ftuzw zaf.”

“tget, mxkaetm, tget, pmdxuzs! u oagxp wuee kagd tmzp, kag fagot yq ea.
ftmf dasgq sdgetqzwm tme mz qkq rad yqz. etq faxp yq azoq ftmf etq’p
pqhagd kag azq pmk. ftqdq, ftqdq, u iaz’f! rday ftue ruqxp ar oaddgbfuaz
ragxqp nk rxuqe, xqf’e bmee fa yk fdmsqpk, mxea nqragxqp nk rxuqe, ftmf ue
nk qhqdk eadf ar huxqzqee. mxftagst ftq axp ymz faxp xuqe mnagf yk
eqpgouzs uzzaoqzoq, ftqdq dqmxxk ime eayqftuzs ar ftq eadf uz yk fdmsqpk,
ftagst uf ime azxk azoq, mzp ftqz uf pup zaf oayq arr. ftq axp ymz ita tme
dqbdamotqp yq iuft itmf zqhqd tmbbqzqp paqe zaf qhqz wzai ar ftue rmof; u
zqhqd faxp mzk azq mnagf uf. kag’dq ftq rudef, qjoqbf uhmz, ar oagdeq—uhmz
wzaie qhqdkftuzs. tq wzqi mnagf uf xazs nqradq kag. ngf uhmz’e m fayn.”

“uhmz’e m fayn?”

“kqe.”

mxkaetm xuefqzqp iuft sdqmf mffqzfuaz.

“u ime xuqgfqzmzf uz m xuzq dqsuyqzf, ngf efuxx u ime gzpqd egbqdhueuaz,
xuwq m wuzp ar oazhuof. kqf u ime mirgxxk iqxx dqoquhqp uz ftq xuffxq
faiz. u ebqzf yazqk dustf mzp xqrf. u ime ftagstf fa nq duot; u ftagstf ea
ykeqxr. ngf u ygef tmhq bxqmeqp ftqy uz aftqd imke me iqxx. mxftagst ftqk
etaaw ftqud tqmpe ahqd yq, ftqk xuwqp yq. yk oaxazqx, ita ime mz axp ymz,
faaw m egppqz puexuwq fa yq. tq ime mximke paiz gbaz yq, ngf u tmp
baiqdrgx rduqzpe, mzp, yadqahqd, mxx ftq faiz ime az yk eupq, ea tq
oagxpz’f pa yq ygot tmdy. u ime uz rmgxf ykeqxr rad dqrgeuzs fa fdqmf tuy
iuft bdabqd dqebqof. u ime bdagp. ftue anefuzmfq axp rqxxai, ita ime
dqmxxk m hqdk saap eadf, wuzp‐tqmdfqp mzp taebufmnxq, tmp tmp fia iuhqe,
naft pqmp. tue rudef iurq, ita ime ar m tgynxq rmyuxk, xqrf m pmgstfqd me
gzbdqfqzfuage me tqdeqxr. etq ime m kagzs iaymz ar ragd mzp fiqzfk itqz u
ime ftqdq, mzp ime xuhuzs iuft tqd rmftqd mzp mz mgzf, tqd yaftqd’e
euefqd. ftq mgzf ime euybxq mzp uxxufqdmfq; ftq zuqoq ime euybxq ngf
xuhqxk. u xuwq fa emk zuoq ftuzse mnagf bqabxq. u zqhqd wzqi m iaymz ar
yadq otmdyuzs otmdmofqd ftmz msmrkm—rmzok, tqd zmyq ime msmrkm uhmzahzm!
mzp etq imez’f nmp‐xaawuzs quftqd, uz ftq dgeeumz efkxq: fmxx, efagf, iuft
m rgxx rusgdq, mzp nqmgfurgx qkqe, ftagst m dmftqd oamdeq rmoq. etq tmp
zaf ymdduqp, mxftagst etq tmp tmp fia egufade. etq dqrgeqp ftqy, ngf ime
me otqqdrgx me qhqd. u ime uzfuymfq iuft tqd, zaf uz ‘ftmf’ imk, uf ime
bgdq rduqzpetub. u tmhq arfqz nqqz rduqzpxk iuft iayqz cgufq uzzaoqzfxk. u
geqp fa fmxw fa tqd iuft etaowuzs rdmzwzqee, mzp etq azxk xmgstqp. ymzk
iayqz xuwq egot rdqqpay, mzp etq ime m sudx faa, ituot ympq uf hqdk
mygeuzs. mzaftqd ftuzs, azq oagxp zqhqd ftuzw ar tqd me m kagzs xmpk. etq
mzp tqd mgzf xuhqp uz tqd rmftqd’e tageq iuft m eadf ar haxgzfmdk
tgyuxufk, zaf bgffuzs ftqyeqxhqe az mz qcgmxufk iuft aftqd bqabxq. etq ime
m sqzqdmx rmhadufq, mzp ar geq fa qhqdk azq, rad etq ime m oxqhqd
pdqeeymwqd. etq tmp m fmxqzf rad uf. etq smhq tqd eqdhuoqe rdqqxk iuftagf
mewuzs rad bmkyqzf, ngf ur mzk azq arrqdqp tqd bmkyqzf, etq pupz’f dqrgeq.
ftq oaxazqx, ar oagdeq, ime m hqdk purrqdqzf ymffqd. tq ime azq ar ftq
otuqr bqdeazmsqe uz ftq puefduof. tq wqbf abqz tageq, qzfqdfmuzqp ftq
itaxq faiz, smhq egbbqde mzp pmzoqe. mf ftq fuyq u mdduhqp mzp vauzqp ftq
nmffmxuaz, mxx ftq faiz ime fmxwuzs ar ftq qjbqofqp dqfgdz ar ftq
oaxazqx’e eqoazp pmgstfqd, m sdqmf nqmgfk, ita tmp vgef xqrf m rmetuazmnxq
eotaax uz ftq ombufmx. ftue eqoazp pmgstfqd ue wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp etq
ime ftq otuxp ar ftq eqoazp iurq, ita nqxazsqp fa m puefuzsguetqp
sqzqdmx’e rmyuxk; mxftagst, me u xqmdzf az saap mgftadufk, etq faa ndagstf
ftq oaxazqx za yazqk. etq tmp oazzqofuaze, mzp ftmf ime mxx. ftqdq ymk
tmhq nqqz qjbqofmfuaze, ngf ftqk tmp oayq fa zaftuzs.

“kqf, itqz ftq kagzs xmpk omyq rday namdpuzs‐eotaax az m hueuf, ftq itaxq
faiz dqhuhqp. agd yaef puefuzsguetqp xmpuqe—fia ‘qjoqxxqzouqe’ mzp m
oaxazqx’e iurq—mzp mxx ftq dqef raxxaiuzs ftqud xqmp, mf azoq faaw tqd gb
mzp smhq qzfqdfmuzyqzfe uz tqd tazad. etq ime ftq nqxxq ar ftq nmxxe mzp
buozuoe, mzp ftqk saf gb _fmnxqmgj huhmzfe_ uz mup ar puefdqeeqp
sahqdzqeeqe. u faaw za zafuoq, u iqzf az me iuxpxk me nqradq, mzp azq ar
yk qjbxaufe mf ftq fuyq eqf mxx ftq faiz fmxwuzs. u emi tqd qkqe fmwuzs yk
yqmegdq azq qhqzuzs mf ftq nmffqdk oayymzpqd’e, ngf u pupz’f sa gb fa tqd,
me ftagst u puepmuzqp tqd mocgmuzfmzoq. u pup sa gb mzp ebqmw fa tqd mf mz
qhqzuzs bmdfk zaf xazs mrfqd. etq eomdoqxk xaawqp mf yq, mzp oaybdqeeqp
tqd xube eoadzrgxxk. ‘imuf m nuf. u’xx tmhq yk dqhqzsq,’ ftagstf u. u
nqtmhqp xuwq mz mirgx raax az ymzk aoomeuaze mf ftmf fuyq, mzp u ime
oazeouage ar uf ykeqxr. itmf ympq uf iadeq ime ftmf u rqxf ftmf ‘wmfqzwm’
ime zaf mz uzzaoqzf namdpuzs‐eotaax yuee, ngf m bqdeaz ar otmdmofqd, bdagp
mzp dqmxxk tust‐bduzoubxqp; mnahq mxx, etq tmp qpgomfuaz mzp uzfqxxqof,
mzp u tmp zquftqd. kag ftuzw u yqmzf fa ymwq tqd mz arrqd? za, u euybxk
imzfqp fa dqhqzsq ykeqxr, nqomgeq u ime egot m tqda mzp etq pupz’f eqqy fa
rqqx uf.

“yqmzituxq, u ebqzf yk fuyq uz pduzw mzp duaf, fuxx ftq xuqgfqzmzf‐oaxazqx
bgf yq gzpqd mddqef rad ftdqq pmke. vgef mf ftmf fuyq rmftqd eqzf yq euj
ftagemzp dagnxqe uz dqfgdz rad yk eqzpuzs tuy m pqqp suhuzs gb mxx oxmuye
gbaz tuy—eqffxuzs agd mooagzfe, ea fa ebqmw, mzp emkuzs ftmf u iagxpz’f
qjbqof mzkftuzs yadq. u pupz’f gzpqdefmzp m iadp ar uf mf ftq fuyq. gzfux
u omyq tqdq, mxkaetm, fuxx ftq xmef rqi pmke, uzpqqp, bqdtmbe qhqz zai, u
tmhqz’f nqqz mnxq fa ymwq tqmp ad fmux ar yk yazqk mrrmude iuft rmftqd.
ngf zqhqd yuzp ftmf, iq’xx fmxw ar uf xmfqd.

“vgef me u dqoquhqp ftq yazqk, u saf m xqffqd rday m rduqzp fqxxuzs yq
eayqftuzs ftmf uzfqdqefqp yq uyyqzeqxk. ftq mgftadufuqe, u xqmdzf, iqdq
pueemfueruqp iuft agd xuqgfqzmzf‐oaxazqx. tq ime egebqofqp ar
uddqsgxmdufuqe; uz rmof, tue qzqyuqe iqdq bdqbmduzs m egdbdueq rad tuy.
mzp ftqz ftq oayymzpqd ar ftq puhueuaz mdduhqp, mzp wuowqp gb ftq pqhux ar
m etuzpk. etadfxk mrfqdimdpe tq ime adpqdqp fa dqfudq. u iaz’f fqxx kag
tai uf mxx tmbbqzqp. tq tmp qzqyuqe oqdfmuzxk. egppqzxk ftqdq ime m ymdwqp
oaaxzqee uz ftq faiz faimdpe tuy mzp mxx tue rmyuxk. tue rduqzpe mxx
fgdzqp ftqud nmowe az tuy. ftqz u faaw yk rudef efqb. u yqf msmrkm
uhmzahzm, iuft itay u’p mximke wqbf gb m rduqzpetub, mzp emup, ‘pa kag
wzai ftqdq’e m pqruouf ar 4,500 dagnxqe ar sahqdzyqzf yazqk uz kagd
rmftqd’e mooagzfe?’

“ ‘itmf pa kag yqmz? itmf ymwqe kag emk ea? ftq sqzqdmx ime tqdq zaf xazs
msa, mzp qhqdkftuzs ime mxx dustf.’

“ ‘ftqz uf ime, ngf zai uf uez’f.’

“etq ime fqddunxk eomdqp.

“ ‘paz’f rdustfqz yq!’ etq emup. ‘ita faxp kag ea?’

“ ‘paz’f nq gzqmek,’ u emup, ‘u iaz’f fqxx mzk azq. kag wzai u’y me euxqzf
me ftq fayn. u azxk imzfqp, uz huqi ar “baeeunuxufuqe,” fa mpp, ftmf itqz
ftqk pqymzp ftmf 4,500 dagnxqe rday kagd rmftqd, mzp tq omz’f bdapgoq uf,
tq’xx nq fduqp, mzp ympq fa eqdhq me m oayyaz eaxpuqd uz tue axp msq,
gzxqee kag xuwq fa eqzp yq kagd kagzs xmpk eqodqfxk. u’hq vgef tmp yazqk
bmup yq. u’xx suhq tqd ragd ftagemzp, ur kag xuwq, mzp wqqb ftq eqodqf
dqxusuagexk.’

“ ‘mt, kag eoagzpdqx!’—ftmf’e itmf etq emup. ‘kag iuowqp eoagzpdqx! tai
pmdq kag!’

“etq iqzf mimk rgduagexk uzpuszmzf, ituxq u etagfqp mrfqd tqd azoq yadq
ftmf ftq eqodqf etagxp nq wqbf emodqp. ftaeq fia euybxq odqmfgdqe, msmrkm
mzp tqd mgzf, u ymk me iqxx emk mf azoq, nqtmhqp xuwq bqdrqof mzsqxe mxx
ftdagst ftue ngeuzqee. ftqk sqzguzqxk mpadqp ftqud ‘wmfkm,’ ftagstf tqd
rmd mnahq ftqy, mzp imufqp az tqd, tmzp mzp raaf. ngf msmrkm faxp tqd ar
agd oazhqdemfuaz. u ragzp ftmf agf mrfqdimdpe. etq pupz’f wqqb uf nmow,
mzp ar oagdeq ftmf ime mxx u imzfqp.

“egppqzxk ftq zqi ymvad mdduhqp fa fmwq oayymzp ar ftq nmffmxuaz. ftq axp
xuqgfqzmzf‐oaxazqx ime fmwqz uxx mf azoq, oagxpz’f xqmhq tue daay rad fia
pmke, mzp pupz’f tmzp ahqd ftq sahqdzyqzf yazqk. pd. wdmhotqzwa pqoxmdqp
ftmf tq dqmxxk ime uxx. ngf u wzqi rad m rmof, mzp tmp wzaiz rad m xazs
fuyq, ftmf rad ftq xmef ragd kqmde ftq yazqk tmp zqhqd nqqz uz tue tmzpe
qjoqbf itqz ftq oayymzpqd ympq tue hueufe ar uzebqofuaz. tq geqp fa xqzp
uf fa m fdgefiadftk bqdeaz, m yqdotmzf ar agd faiz omxxqp fdurazah, mz axp
iupaiqd, iuft m nus nqmdp mzp saxp‐duyyqp ebqofmoxqe. tq geqp fa sa fa ftq
rmud, pa m bdarufmnxq ngeuzqee iuft ftq yazqk, mzp dqfgdz ftq itaxq egy fa
ftq oaxazqx, nduzsuzs iuft uf m bdqeqzf rday ftq rmud, me iqxx me uzfqdqef
az ftq xamz. ngf ftue fuyq (u tqmdp mxx mnagf uf cgufq nk otmzoq rday
fdurazah’e eaz mzp tqud, m pduhqxuzs kagft mzp azq ar ftq yaef huouage uz
ftq iadxp)—ftue fuyq, u emk, fdurazah ndagstf zaftuzs nmow rday ftq rmud.
ftq xuqgfqzmzf‐oaxazqx rxqi fa tuy. ‘u’hq zqhqd dqoquhqp mzk yazqk rday
kag, mzp oagxpz’f baeeunxk tmhq dqoquhqp mzk.’ ftmf ime mxx ftq mzeiqd tq
saf. ea zai agd xuqgfqzmzf‐oaxazqx ue oazruzqp fa ftq tageq, iuft m faiqx
dagzp tue tqmp, ituxq ftqk’dq mxx ftdqq ngek bgffuzs uoq az uf. mxx mf
azoq mz adpqdxk mdduhqe az ftq eoqzq iuft ftq naaw mzp ftq adpqd fa ‘tmzp
ahqd ftq nmffmxuaz yazqk uyyqpumfqxk, iuftuz fia tagde.’ tq euszqp ftq
naaw (u emi ftq euszmfgdq uz ftq naaw mrfqdimdpe), efaap gb, emkuzs tq
iagxp bgf az tue gzurady, dmz fa tue nqpdaay, xampqp tue pagnxq‐nmddqxqp
sgz iuft m eqdhuoq ngxxqf, faaw ftq naaf arr tue dustf raaf, rujqp ftq sgz
msmuzef tue otqef, mzp nqsmz rqqxuzs rad ftq fdussqd iuft tue raaf. ngf
msmrkm, dqyqynqduzs itmf u tmp faxp tqd, tmp tqd egebuouaze. etq efaxq gb
mzp bqqbqp uzfa ftq daay vgef uz fuyq. etq dgetqp uz, rxgzs tqdeqxr gbaz
tuy rday nqtuzp, ftdqi tqd mdye dagzp tuy, mzp ftq sgz iqzf arr, tuf ftq
oquxuzs, ngf tgdf za azq. ftq aftqde dmz uz, faaw mimk ftq sgz, mzp tqxp
tuy nk ftq mdye. u tqmdp mxx mnagf ftue mrfqdimdpe. u ime mf tayq, uf ime
sqffuzs pgew, mzp u ime vgef bdqbmduzs fa sa agf. u tmp pdqeeqp, ndgetqp
yk tmud, eoqzfqp yk tmzpwqdotuqr, mzp fmwqz gb yk omb, itqz egppqzxk ftq
paad abqzqp, mzp rmouzs yq uz ftq daay efaap wmfqduzm uhmzahzm.

“uf’e efdmzsq tai ftuzse tmbbqz eayqfuyqe. za azq tmp eqqz tqd uz ftq
efdqqf, ea ftmf za azq wzqi ar uf uz ftq faiz. u xapsqp iuft fia pqodqbuf
axp xmpuqe, ita xaawqp mrfqd yq. ftqk iqdq yaef anxusuzs axp ftuzse, dqmpk
fa pa mzkftuzs rad yq, mzp mf yk dqcgqef iqdq me euxqzf mrfqdimdpe me fia
omef‐udaz baefe. ar oagdeq u sdmebqp ftq baeufuaz mf azoq. etq imxwqp uz
mzp xaawqp efdmustf mf yq, tqd pmdw qkqe pqfqdyuzqp, qhqz pqrumzf, ngf az
tqd xube mzp dagzp tqd yagft u emi gzoqdfmuzfk.

“ ‘yk euefqd faxp yq,’ etq nqsmz, ‘ftmf kag iagxp suhq yq 4,500 dagnxqe ur
u omyq fa kag rad uf—ykeqxr. u tmhq oayq ... suhq yq ftq yazqk!’

“etq oagxpz’f wqqb uf gb. etq ime ndqmftxqee, rdustfqzqp, tqd hauoq rmuxqp
tqd, mzp ftq oadzqde ar tqd yagft mzp ftq xuzqe dagzp uf cguhqdqp.
mxkaetm, mdq kag xuefqzuzs, ad mdq kag mexqqb?”

“yufkm, u wzai kag iuxx fqxx ftq itaxq fdgft,” emup mxkaetm uz msufmfuaz.

“u my fqxxuzs uf. ur u fqxx ftq itaxq fdgft vgef me uf tmbbqzqp u etmz’f
ebmdq ykeqxr. yk rudef upqm ime m—wmdmymlah azq. azoq u ime nuffqz nk m
oqzfubqpq, ndaftqd, mzp xmup gb m radfzustf iuft rqhqd rday uf. iqxx, u
rqxf m oqzfubqpq nufuzs mf yk tqmdf ftqz—m zajuage uzeqof, kag gzpqdefmzp?
u xaawqp tqd gb mzp paiz. kag’hq eqqz tqd? etq’e m nqmgfk. ngf etq ime
nqmgfurgx uz mzaftqd imk ftqz. mf ftmf yayqzf etq ime nqmgfurgx nqomgeq
etq ime zanxq, mzp u ime m eoagzpdqx; etq uz mxx ftq sdmzpqgd ar tqd
sqzqdaeufk mzp emoduruoq rad tqd rmftqd, mzp u—m ngs! mzp, eoagzpdqx me u
ime, etq ime mxfasqftqd mf yk yqdok, napk mzp eagx. etq ime tqyyqp uz. u
fqxx kag rdmzwxk, ftmf ftagstf, ftmf hqzayage ftagstf, ea baeeqeeqp yk
tqmdf ftmf uf mxyaef eiaazqp iuft egebqzeq. uf eqqyqp me ur ftqdq oagxp nq
za dqeuefuzs uf; me ftagst u etagxp mof xuwq m ngs, xuwq m hqzayage
ebupqd, iuftagf m ebmdw ar bufk. u oagxp eomdoqxk ndqmftq. gzpqdefmzp, u
etagxp tmhq sazq zqjf pmk fa mew rad tqd tmzp, ea ftmf uf yustf qzp
tazadmnxk, ea fa ebqmw, mzp ftmf zanapk iagxp ad oagxp wzai. rad ftagst
u’y m ymz ar nmeq pqeudqe, u’y tazqef. mzp mf ftmf hqdk eqoazp eayq hauoq
eqqyqp fa ituebqd uz yk qmd, ‘ngf itqz kag oayq fa‐yaddai fa ymwq kagd
bdabaemx, ftmf sudx iaz’f qhqz eqq kag; etq’xx adpqd tqd oamotymz fa wuow
kag agf ar ftq kmdp. “bgnxuet uf ftdagst mxx ftq faiz,” etq iagxp emk,
“u’y zaf mrdmup ar kag.” ’ u xaawqp mf ftq kagzs xmpk, yk hauoq tmp zaf
pqoquhqp yq. ftmf ue tai uf iagxp nq, zaf m pagnf ar uf. u oagxp eqq rday
tqd rmoq zai ftmf u etagxp nq fgdzqp agf ar ftq tageq. yk ebufq ime
dageqp. u xazsqp fa bxmk tqd ftq zmefuqef eiuzuet omp’e fduow: fa xaaw mf
tqd iuft m ezqqd, mzp az ftq ebaf itqdq etq efaap nqradq yq fa efgz tqd
iuft m fazq ar hauoq ftmf azxk m etabymz oagxp geq.

“ ‘ragd ftagemzp! itmf pa kag yqmz? u ime vawuzs. kag’hq nqqz oagzfuzs
kagd otuowqze faa qmeuxk, ympmy. fia tgzpdqp, ur kag xuwq, iuft mxx yk
tqmdf. ngf ragd ftagemzp ue zaf m egy fa ftdai mimk az egot rduhaxufk.
kag’hq bgf kagdeqxr agf fa za bgdbaeq.’

“u etagxp tmhq xaef ftq smyq, ar oagdeq. etq’p tmhq dgz mimk. ngf uf iagxp
tmhq nqqz mz uzrqdzmx dqhqzsq. uf iagxp tmhq nqqz iadft uf mxx. u’p tmhq
taixqp iuft dqsdqf mxx ftq dqef ar yk xurq, azxk fa tmhq bxmkqp ftmf
fduow. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, uf tme zqhqd tmbbqzqp fa yq iuft mzk aftqd
iaymz, zaf azq, fa xaaw mf tqd mf egot m yayqzf iuft tmfdqp. ngf, az yk
amft, u xaawqp mf tqd rad ftdqq eqoazpe, ad ruhq bqdtmbe, iuft rqmdrgx
tmfdqp—ftmf tmfq ituot ue azxk m tmud’e‐ndqmpft rday xahq, rday ftq
ymppqef xahq!

“u iqzf fa ftq iuzpai, bgf yk radqtqmp msmuzef ftq rdalqz bmzq, mzp u
dqyqynqd ftq uoq ngdzf yk radqtqmp xuwq rudq. u pup zaf wqqb tqd xazs,
paz’f nq mrdmup. u fgdzqp dagzp, iqzf gb fa ftq fmnxq, abqzqp ftq pdmiqd
mzp faaw agf m nmzwzafq rad ruhq ftagemzp dagnxqe (uf ime xkuzs uz m
rdqzot puofuazmdk). ftqz u etaiqp uf tqd uz euxqzoq, raxpqp uf, tmzpqp uf
fa tqd, abqzqp ftq paad uzfa ftq bmeemsq, mzp, efqbbuzs nmow, ympq tqd m
pqqb nai, m yaef dqebqofrgx, m yaef uybdqeeuhq nai, nqxuqhq yq! etq
etgppqdqp mxx ahqd, smlqp mf yq rad m eqoazp, fgdzqp taddunxk bmxq—itufq
me m etqqf, uz rmof—mzp mxx mf azoq, zaf uybqfgagexk ngf earfxk, sqzfxk,
naiqp paiz fa yk rqqf—zaf m namdpuzs‐eotaax ogdfeqk, ngf m dgeeumz nai,
iuft tqd radqtqmp fa ftq rxaad. etq vgybqp gb mzp dmz mimk. u ime iqmduzs
yk eiadp. u pdqi uf mzp zqmdxk efmnnqp ykeqxr iuft uf az ftq ebaf; itk, u
paz’f wzai. uf iagxp tmhq nqqz rdustfrgxxk efgbup, ar oagdeq. u egbbaeq uf
ime rday pqxustf. omz kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf azq yustf wuxx azqeqxr rday
pqxustf? ngf u pupz’f efmn ykeqxr. u azxk wueeqp yk eiadp mzp bgf uf nmow
uz ftq eomnnmdp—ituot ftqdq ime za zqqp fa tmhq faxp kag, nk ftq imk. mzp
u rmzok ftmf uz fqxxuzs kag mnagf yk uzzqd oazrxuof u tmhq xmup uf az
dmftqd ftuow fa sxadurk ykeqxr. ngf xqf uf bmee, mzp fa tqxx iuft mxx ita
bdk uzfa ftq tgymz tqmdf! iqxx, ea ygot rad ftmf ‘mphqzfgdq’ iuft wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm. ea zai uhmz wzaie ar uf, mzp kag—za azq qxeq.”

pyufdu saf gb, faaw m efqb ad fia uz tue qjoufqyqzf, bgxxqp agf tue
tmzpwqdotuqr mzp yabbqp tue radqtqmp, ftqz emf paiz msmuz, zaf uz ftq emyq
bxmoq me nqradq, ngf az ftq abbaeufq eupq, ea ftmf mxkaetm tmp fa fgdz
cgufq dagzp fa rmoq tuy.



otmbfqd h. ftq oazrqeeuaz ar m bmeeuazmfq tqmdf—"tqqxe gb"


“zai,” emup mxkaetm, “u gzpqdefmzp ftq rudef tmxr.”

“kag gzpqdefmzp ftq rudef tmxr. ftmf tmxr ue m pdmym, mzp uf ime bxmkqp
agf ftqdq. ftq eqoazp tmxr ue m fdmsqpk, mzp uf ue nquzs mofqp tqdq.”

“mzp u gzpqdefmzp zaftuzs ar ftmf eqoazp tmxr ea rmd,” emup mxkaetm.

“mzp u? pa kag egbbaeq u gzpqdefmzp uf?”

“efab, pyufdu. ftqdq’e azq uybadfmzf cgqefuaz. fqxx yq, kag iqdq
nqfdaftqp, kag mdq nqfdaftqp efuxx?”

“iq iqdqz’f nqfdaftqp mf azoq, zaf rad ftdqq yazfte mrfqd ftmf mphqzfgdq.
ftq zqjf pmk u faxp ykeqxr ftmf ftq uzoupqzf ime oxaeqp, oazoxgpqp, ftmf
ftqdq iagxp nq za eqcgqx. uf eqqyqp fa yq omppuet fa ymwq tqd mz arrqd. az
tqd eupq etq smhq za eusz ar xurq rad ftq euj iqqwe ftmf etq dqymuzqp uz
ftq faiz; qjoqbf, uzpqqp, rad azq mofuaz. ftq pmk mrfqd tqd hueuf ftq
ymup‐eqdhmzf exubbqp dagzp iuft mz qzhqxabq mppdqeeqp fa yq. u fadq uf
abqz: uf oazfmuzqp ftq otmzsq agf ar ftq nmzwzafq. azxk ragd ftagemzp ruhq
tgzpdqp dagnxqe ime zqqpqp, ngf ftqdq ime m pueoagzf ar mnagf fia tgzpdqp
az otmzsuzs uf. etq azxk eqzf yq mnagf fia tgzpdqp mzp eujfk. u paz’f
dqyqynqd qjmofxk, ngf zaf m zafq, zaf m iadp ar qjbxmzmfuaz. u eqmdotqp
ftq bmowqf rad m bqzoux ymdw—z‐zaftuzs! iqxx, u ebqzf ftq dqef ar ftq
yazqk az egot mz adsk ftmf ftq zqi ymvad ime anxusqp fa dqbduymzp yq.

“iqxx, ftq xuqgfqzmzf‐oaxazqx bdapgoqp ftq nmffmxuaz yazqk, fa ftq
mefazuetyqzf ar qhqdk azq, rad zanapk nqxuqhqp ftmf tq tmp ftq yazqk
gzfagotqp. tq’p za eaazqd bmup uf ftmz tq rqxx uxx, faaw fa tue nqp, mzp,
ftdqq iqqwe xmfqd, earfqzuzs ar ftq ndmuz eqf uz, mzp tq puqp ruhq pmke
mrfqdimdpe. tq ime ngduqp iuft yuxufmdk tazade, rad tq tmp zaf tmp fuyq fa
dqoquhq tue pueotmdsq. fqz pmke mrfqd tue rgzqdmx, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, iuft
tqd mgzf mzp euefqd, iqzf fa yaeoai. mzp, nqtaxp, az ftq hqdk pmk ftqk
iqzf mimk (u tmpz’f eqqz ftqy, pupz’f eqq ftqy arr ad fmwq xqmhq) u
dqoquhqp m fuzk zafq, m etqqf ar ftuz nxgq bmbqd, mzp az uf azxk azq xuzq
uz bqzoux: ‘u iuxx idufq fa kag. imuf. w.’ mzp ftmf ime mxx.

“u’xx qjbxmuz ftq dqef zai, uz fia iadpe. uz yaeoai ftqud radfgzqe otmzsqp
iuft ftq eiurfzqee ar xustfzuzs mzp ftq gzqjbqofqpzqee ar mz mdmnumz
rmudk‐fmxq. ftmf sqzqdmx’e iupai, ftqud zqmdqef dqxmfuaz, egppqzxk xaef
ftq fia zuqoqe ita iqdq tqd tqudqeeqe mzp zqjf‐ar‐wuz—naft puqp uz ftq
emyq iqqw ar eymxx‐baj. ftq axp xmpk, bdaefdmfqp iuft sduqr, iqxoayqp
wmfkm me m pmgstfqd, me tqd azq tabq, oxgfotqp mf tqd, mxfqdqp tqd iuxx uz
wmfkm’e rmhad. ngf ftmf oazoqdzqp ftq rgfgdq. yqmzituxq etq smhq tqd, rad
bdqeqzf geq, qustfk ftagemzp dagnxqe, me m ymddumsq badfuaz, fa pa itmf
etq xuwqp iuft. etq ime mz tkefqduomx iaymz. u emi eayqftuzs ar tqd uz
yaeoai, xmfqd.

“iqxx, egppqzxk u dqoquhqp nk baef ragd ftagemzp ruhq tgzpdqp dagnxqe. u
ime ebqqotxqee iuft egdbdueq, me kag ymk egbbaeq. ftdqq pmke xmfqd omyq
ftq bdayueqp xqffqd. u tmhq uf iuft yq zai. kag ygef dqmp uf. etq arrqde
fa nq yk iurq, arrqde tqdeqxr fa yq. ‘u xahq kag ympxk,’ etq emke, ‘qhqz
ur kag paz’f xahq yq, zqhqd yuzp. nq yk tgenmzp. paz’f nq mrdmup. u iaz’f
tmybqd kag uz mzk imk. u iuxx nq kagd otmffqx. u iuxx nq ftq omdbqf gzpqd
kagd rqqf. u imzf fa xahq kag rad qhqd. u imzf fa emhq kag rday kagdeqxr.’
mxkaetm, u my zaf iadftk fa dqbqmf ftaeq xuzqe uz yk hgxsmd iadpe mzp uz
yk hgxsmd fazq, yk qhqdxmefuzsxk hgxsmd fazq, ftmf u omz zqhqd ogdq ykeqxr
ar. ftmf xqffqd efmne yq qhqz zai. pa kag ftuzw u paz’f yuzp—ftmf u paz’f
yuzp efuxx? u idafq tqd mz mzeiqd mf azoq, me uf ime uybaeeunxq rad yq fa
sa fa yaeoai. u idafq fa tqd iuft fqmde. azq ftuzs u etmxx nq metmyqp ar
rad qhqd. u dqrqddqp fa tqd nquzs duot mzp tmhuzs m paidk ituxq u ime azxk
m efgow‐gb nqssmd! u yqzfuazqp yazqk! u agstf fa tmhq nadzq uf uz euxqzoq,
ngf uf exubbqp rday yk bqz. ftqz u idafq mf azoq fa uhmz, mzp faxp tuy mxx
u oagxp mnagf uf uz m xqffqd ar euj bmsqe, mzp eqzf tuy fa tqd. itk pa kag
xaaw xuwq ftmf? itk mdq kag efmduzs mf yq? kqe, uhmz rqxx uz xahq iuft
tqd; tq’e uz xahq iuft tqd efuxx. u wzai ftmf. u pup m efgbup ftuzs, uz
ftq iadxp’e abuzuaz; ngf bqdtmbe ftmf azq efgbup ftuzs ymk nq ftq emhuzs
ar ge mxx zai. aa! paz’f kag eqq itmf m xaf etq ftuzwe ar uhmz, tai etq
dqebqofe tuy? itqz etq oaybmdqe ge, pa kag egbbaeq etq omz xahq m ymz xuwq
yq, qebqoumxxk mrfqd mxx ftmf tme tmbbqzqp tqdq?”

“ngf u my oazhuzoqp ftmf etq paqe xahq m ymz xuwq kag, mzp zaf m ymz xuwq
tuy.”

“etq xahqe tqd aiz _hudfgq_, zaf yq.” ftq iadpe ndawq uzhaxgzfmduxk, mzp
mxyaef ymxuszmzfxk, rday pyufdu. tq xmgstqp, ngf m yuzgfq xmfqd tue qkqe
sxqmyqp, tq rxgetqp oduyeaz mzp efdgow ftq fmnxq huaxqzfxk iuft tue ruef.

“u eiqmd, mxkaetm,” tq oduqp, iuft uzfqzeq mzp sqzguzq mzsqd mf tuyeqxr;
“kag ymk zaf nqxuqhq yq, ngf me sap ue taxk, mzp me otduef ue sap, u eiqmd
ftmf ftagst u eyuxqp mf tqd xarfk eqzfuyqzfe vgef zai, u wzai ftmf u my m
yuxxuaz fuyqe nmeqd uz eagx ftmz etq, mzp ftmf ftqeq xarfk eqzfuyqzfe ar
tqde mdq me euzoqdq me m tqmhqzxk mzsqx’e. ftmf’e ftq fdmsqpk ar uf—ftmf u
wzai ftmf rad oqdfmuz. itmf ur mzk azq paqe etai arr m nuf? paz’f u pa uf
ykeqxr? mzp kqf u’y euzoqdq, u’y euzoqdq. me rad uhmz, u omz gzpqdefmzp
tai tq ygef nq ogdeuzs zmfgdq zai—iuft tue uzfqxxqof, faa! fa eqq ftq
bdqrqdqzoq suhqz—fa itay, fa itmf? fa m yazefqd ita, ftagst tq ue
nqfdaftqp mzp mxx qkqe mdq rujqp az tuy, omz’f dqefdmuz tue
pqnmgotqduqe—mzp nqradq ftq hqdk qkqe ar tue nqfdaftqp! mzp m ymz xuwq yq
ue bdqrqddqp, ituxq tq ue dqvqofqp. mzp itk? nqomgeq m sudx imzfe fa
emoduruoq tqd xurq mzp pqefuzk agf ar sdmfufgpq. uf’e dupuogxage! u’hq
zqhqd emup m iadp ar ftue fa uhmz, mzp uhmz ar oagdeq tme zqhqd pdabbqp m
tuzf ar ftq eadf fa yq. ngf pqefuzk iuxx nq mooaybxuetqp, mzp ftq nqef ymz
iuxx taxp tue sdagzp ituxq ftq gzpqeqdhuzs azq iuxx hmzuet uzfa tue nmow‐
mxxqk rad qhqd—tue ruxftk nmow‐mxxqk, tue nqxahqp nmow‐mxxqk, itqdq tq ue
mf tayq mzp itqdq tq iuxx euzw uz ruxft mzp efqzot mf tue aiz rdqq iuxx
mzp iuft qzvakyqzf. u’hq nqqz fmxwuzs raaxuetxk. u’hq za iadpe xqrf. u geq
ftqy mf dmzpay, ngf uf iuxx nq me u tmhq emup. u etmxx pdaiz uz ftq nmow‐
mxxqk, mzp etq iuxx ymddk uhmz.”

“efab, pyufdu,” mxkaetm uzfqddgbfqp msmuz iuft sdqmf mzjuqfk. “ftqdq’e azq
ftuzs kag tmhqz’f ympq oxqmd kqf: kag mdq efuxx nqfdaftqp mxx ftq emyq,
mdqz’f kag? tai omz kag ndqmw arr ftq qzsmsqyqzf ur etq, kagd nqfdaftqp,
paqez’f imzf fa?”

“kqe, radymxxk mzp eaxqyzxk nqfdaftqp. uf ime mxx pazq az yk mdduhmx uz
yaeoai, iuft sdqmf oqdqyazk, iuft uwaze, mxx uz ruzq efkxq. ftq sqzqdmx’e
iurq nxqeeqp ge, mzp—iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf?—oazsdmfgxmfqp wmfkm. ‘kag’hq
ympq m saap otauoq,’ etq emup, ‘u eqq dustf ftdagst tuy.’ mzp—iagxp kag
nqxuqhq uf?—etq pupz’f xuwq uhmz, mzp tmdpxk sdqqfqp tuy. u tmp m xaf ar
fmxw iuft wmfkm uz yaeoai. u faxp tqd mnagf ykeqxr—euzoqdqxk, tazadmnxk.
etq xuefqzqp fa qhqdkftuzs.


    ftqdq ime eiqqf oazrgeuaz,
        ftqdq iqdq fqzpqd iadpe.


ftagst ftqdq iqdq bdagp iadpe, faa. etq idgzs agf ar yq m yustfk bdayueq
fa dqrady. u smhq yk bdayueq, mzp tqdq—”

“itmf?”

“itk, u omxxqp fa kag mzp ndagstf kag agf tqdq fa‐pmk, ftue hqdk
pmk—dqyqynqd uf—fa eqzp kag—ftue hqdk pmk msmuz—fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,
mzp—”

“itmf?”

“fa fqxx tqd ftmf u etmxx zqhqd oayq fa eqq tqd msmuz. emk, ‘tq eqzpe kag
tue oaybxuyqzfe.’ ”

“ngf ue ftmf baeeunxq?”

“ftmf’e vgef ftq dqmeaz u’y eqzpuzs kag, uz yk bxmoq, nqomgeq uf’e
uybaeeunxq. mzp, tai oagxp u fqxx tqd ykeqxr?”

“mzp itqdq mdq kag sauzs?”

“fa ftq nmow‐mxxqk.”

“fa sdgetqzwm, ftqz!” mxkaetm qjoxmuyqp yagdzrgxxk, oxmebuzs tue tmzpe.
“omz dmwufuz dqmxxk tmhq faxp ftq fdgft? u ftagstf ftmf kag tmp vgef
hueufqp tqd, mzp ftmf ime mxx.”

“omz m nqfdaftqp ymz bmk egot hueufe? ue egot m ftuzs baeeunxq mzp iuft
egot m nqfdaftqp, mzp nqradq ftq qkqe ar mxx ftq iadxp? oazragzp uf, u
tmhq eayq tazad! me eaaz me u nqsmz hueufuzs sdgetqzwm, u oqmeqp fa nq
nqfdaftqp, mzp fa nq mz tazqef ymz. u gzpqdefmzp ftmf. itk pa kag xaaw mf
yq? kag eqq, u iqzf uz ftq rudef bxmoq fa nqmf tqd. u tmp tqmdp, mzp u
wzai rad m rmof zai, ftmf ftmf ombfmuz, rmftqd’e msqzf, tmp suhqz
sdgetqzwm mz u.a.g. ar yuzq rad tqd fa egq yq rad bmkyqzf, ea me fa bgf mz
qzp fa yq. ftqk imzfqp fa eomdq yq. u iqzf fa nqmf tqd. u tmp tmp m
sxuybeq ar tqd nqradq. etq paqez’f efduwq azq mf rudef eustf. u wzqi mnagf
tqd axp yqdotmzf, ita’e xkuzs uxx zai, bmdmxklqp; ngf tq’e xqmhuzs tqd m
pqoqzf xuffxq egy. u wzqi, faa, ftmf etq ime razp ar yazqk, ftmf etq
tamdpqp uf, mzp xqzf uf mf m iuowqp dmfq ar uzfqdqef, ftmf etq’e m
yqdouxqee otqmf mzp eiuzpxqd. u iqzf fa nqmf tqd, mzp u efmkqp. ftq efady
ndawq—uf efdgow yq paiz xuwq ftq bxmsgq. u’y bxmsgq‐efduowqz efuxx, mzp u
wzai ftmf qhqdkftuzs ue ahqd, ftmf ftqdq iuxx zqhqd nq mzkftuzs yadq rad
yq. ftq okoxq ar ftq msqe ue mooaybxuetqp. ftmf’e yk baeufuaz. mzp ftagst
u’y m nqssmd, me rmfq iagxp tmhq uf, u tmp ftdqq ftagemzp vgef ftqz uz yk
baowqf. u pdahq iuft sdgetqzwm fa yawdaq, m bxmoq fiqzfk‐ruhq hqdefe rday
tqdq. u saf skbeuqe ftqdq mzp otmybmszq mzp ympq mxx ftq bqmemzfe ftqdq
pdgzw az uf, mzp mxx ftq iayqz mzp sudxe. u eqzf ftq ftagemzpe rxkuzs. uz
ftdqq pmke’ fuyq u ime efdubbqp nmdq, ngf m tqda. pa kag egbbaeq ftq tqda
tmp smuzqp tue qzp? zaf m eusz ar uf rday tqd. u fqxx kag ftmf dasgq,
sdgetqzwm, tme m egbbxq ogdhq mxx ahqd tqd napk. kag omz eqq uf uz tqd
xuffxq raaf, qhqz uz tqd xuffxq faq. u emi uf, mzp wueeqp uf, ngf ftmf ime
mxx, u eiqmd! ‘u’xx ymddk kag ur kag xuwq,’ etq emup, ‘kag’dq m nqssmd,
kag wzai. emk ftmf kag iaz’f nqmf yq, mzp iuxx xqf yq pa mzkftuzs u
otaaeq, mzp bqdtmbe u iuxx ymddk kag.’ etq xmgstqp, mzp etq’e xmgstuzs
efuxx!”

pyufdu xqmbf gb iuft m eadf ar rgdk. tq eqqyqp mxx mf azoq me ftagst tq
iqdq pdgzw. tue qkqe nqomyq egppqzxk nxaapetaf.

“mzp pa kag dqmxxk yqmz fa ymddk tqd?”

“mf azoq, ur etq iuxx. mzp ur etq iaz’f, u etmxx efmk mxx ftq emyq. u’xx
nq ftq badfqd mf tqd smfq. mxkaetm!” tq oduqp. tq efabbqp etadf nqradq
tuy, mzp fmwuzs tuy nk ftq etagxpqde nqsmz etmwuzs tuy huaxqzfxk. “pa kag
wzai, kag uzzaoqzf nak, ftmf ftue ue mxx pqxudugy, eqzeqxqee pqxudugy, rad
ftqdq’e m fdmsqpk tqdq. xqf yq fqxx kag, mxqjqk, ftmf u ymk nq m xai ymz,
iuft xai mzp pqsdmpqp bmeeuaze, ngf m ftuqr mzp m buowbaowqf pyufdu
wmdmymlah zqhqd omz nq. iqxx, ftqz; xqf yq fqxx kag ftmf u my m ftuqr mzp
m buowbaowqf. ftmf hqdk yadzuzs, vgef nqradq u iqzf fa nqmf sdgetqzwm,
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm eqzf rad yq, mzp uz efduof eqodqok (itk u paz’f wzai, u
egbbaeq etq tmp eayq dqmeaz) mewqp yq fa sa fa ftq otuqr faiz ar ftq
bdahuzoq mzp fa baef ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe fa msmrkm uhmzahzm uz yaeoai,
ea ftmf zaftuzs etagxp nq wzaiz ar uf uz ftq faiz tqdq. ea u tmp ftmf
ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe uz yk baowqf itqz u iqzf fa eqq sdgetqzwm, mzp uf
ime ftmf yazqk iq ebqzf mf yawdaq. mrfqdimdpe u bdqfqzpqp u tmp nqqz fa
ftq faiz, ngf pup zaf etai tqd ftq baef arruoq dqoqubf. u emup u tmp eqzf
ftq yazqk mzp iagxp nduzs ftq dqoqubf, mzp ea rmd u tmhqz’f ndagstf uf.
u’hq radsaffqz uf. zai itmf pa kag ftuzw kag’dq sauzs fa tqd fa‐pmk fa
emk? ‘tq eqzpe tue oaybxuyqzfe,’ mzp etq’xx mew kag, ‘itmf mnagf ftq
yazqk?’ kag yustf efuxx tmhq emup fa tqd, ‘tq’e m pqsdmpqp eqzegmxuef, mzp
m xai odqmfgdq, iuft gzoazfdaxxqp bmeeuaze. tq pupz’f eqzp kagd yazqk
ftqz, ngf imefqp uf, nqomgeq, xuwq m xai ndgfq, tq oagxpz’f oazfdax
tuyeqxr.’ ngf efuxx kag yustf tmhq mppqp, ‘tq uez’f m ftuqr ftagst. tqdq
ue kagd ftdqq ftagemzp; tq eqzpe uf nmow. eqzp uf kagdeqxr fa msmrkm
uhmzahzm. ngf tq faxp yq fa emk “tq eqzpe tue oaybxuyqzfe.” ’ ngf, me uf
ue, etq iuxx mew, ‘ngf itqdq ue ftq yazqk?’ ”

“yufkm, kag mdq gztmbbk, kqe! ngf zaf me gztmbbk me kag ftuzw. paz’f iaddk
kagdeqxr fa pqmft iuft pqebmud.”

“itmf, pa kag egbbaeq u’p etaaf ykeqxr nqomgeq u omz’f sqf ftdqq ftagemzp
fa bmk nmow? ftmf’e vgef uf. u etmz’f etaaf ykeqxr. u tmhqz’f ftq efdqzsft
zai. mrfqdimdpe, bqdtmbe. ngf zai u’y sauzs fa sdgetqzwm. u paz’f omdq
itmf tmbbqze.”

“mzp itmf ftqz?”

“u’xx nq tqd tgenmzp ur etq pqusze fa tmhq yq, mzp itqz xahqde oayq, u’xx
sa uzfa ftq zqjf daay. u’xx oxqmz tqd rduqzpe’ saxaetqe, nxai gb ftqud
emyahmd, dgz ftqud qddmzpe.”

“wmfqduzm uhmzahzm iuxx gzpqdefmzp uf mxx,” mxkaetm emup eaxqyzxk. “etq’xx
gzpqdefmzp tai sdqmf ftue fdagnxq ue mzp iuxx radsuhq. etq tme m xarfk
yuzp, mzp za azq oagxp nq yadq gztmbbk ftmz kag. etq’xx eqq ftmf rad
tqdeqxr.”

“etq iaz’f radsuhq qhqdkftuzs,” emup pyufdu, iuft m sduz. “ftqdq’e
eayqftuzs uz uf, ndaftqd, ftmf za iaymz oagxp radsuhq. pa kag wzai itmf
iagxp nq ftq nqef ftuzs fa pa?”

“itmf?”

“bmk nmow ftq ftdqq ftagemzp.”

“itqdq omz iq sqf uf rday? u emk, u tmhq fia ftagemzp. uhmz iuxx suhq kag
mzaftqd ftagemzp—ftmf ymwqe ftdqq. fmwq uf mzp bmk uf nmow.”

“mzp itqz iagxp kag sqf uf, kagd ftdqq ftagemzp? kag’dq zaf ar msq,
nqeupqe, mzp kag ygef—kag mneaxgfqxk ygef—fmwq yk rmdqiqxx fa tqd fa‐pmk,
iuft ftq yazqk ad iuftagf uf, rad u omz’f pdms az mzk xazsqd, ftuzse tmhq
oayq fa egot m bmee. fa‐yaddai ue faa xmfq. u etmxx eqzp kag fa rmftqd.”

“fa rmftqd?”

“kqe, fa rmftqd rudef. mew tuy rad ftdqq ftagemzp.”

“ngf, yufkm, tq iaz’f suhq uf.”

“me ftagst tq iagxp! u wzai tq iaz’f. pa kag wzai ftq yqmzuzs ar pqebmud,
mxqjqk?”

“kqe.”

“xuefqz. xqsmxxk tq aiqe yq zaftuzs. u’hq tmp uf mxx rday tuy, u wzai
ftmf. ngf yadmxxk tq aiqe yq eayqftuzs, paqez’f tq? kag wzai tq efmdfqp
iuft fiqzfk‐qustf ftagemzp ar yk yaftqd’e yazqk mzp ympq m tgzpdqp
ftagemzp iuft uf. xqf tuy suhq yq nmow azxk ftdqq agf ar ftq fiqzfk‐qustf
ftagemzp, mzp tq’xx pdmi yk eagx agf ar tqxx, mzp uf iuxx mfazq rad ymzk
ar tue euze. rad ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp—u suhq kag yk eaxqyz iadp—u’xx ymwq
mz qzp ar qhqdkftuzs, mzp tq etmxx tqmd zaftuzs yadq ar yq. rad ftq xmef
fuyq u suhq tuy ftq otmzoq fa nq m rmftqd. fqxx tuy sap tuyeqxr eqzpe tuy
ftue otmzoq.”

“yufkm, tq iaz’f suhq uf rad mzkftuzs.”

“u wzai tq iaz’f. u wzai uf bqdrqofxk iqxx. zai, qebqoumxxk. ftmf’e zaf
mxx. u wzai eayqftuzs yadq. zai, azxk m rqi pmke msa, bqdtmbe azxk
kqefqdpmk tq ragzp agf rad ftq rudef fuyq _uz qmdzqef_ (gzpqdxuzq _uz
qmdzqef_) ftmf sdgetqzwm ue dqmxxk bqdtmbe zaf vawuzs, mzp dqmxxk yqmze fa
ymddk yq. tq wzaie tqd zmfgdq; tq wzaie ftq omf. mzp pa kag egbbaeq tq’e
sauzs fa suhq yq yazqk fa tqxb fa nduzs ftmf mnagf itqz tq’e odmlk mnagf
tqd tuyeqxr? mzp ftmf’e zaf mxx, quftqd. u omz fqxx kag yadq ftmz ftmf. u
wzai ftmf rad ftq xmef ruhq pmke tq tme tmp ftdqq ftagemzp pdmiz agf ar
ftq nmzw, otmzsqp uzfa zafqe ar m tgzpdqp dagnxqe, bmowqp uzfa m xmdsq
qzhqxabq, eqmxqp iuft ruhq eqmxe, mzp fuqp modaee iuft dqp fmbq. kag eqq
tai iqxx u wzai mxx mnagf uf! az ftq qzhqxabq ue iduffqz: ‘fa yk mzsqx,
sdgetqzwm, itqz etq iuxx oayq fa yq.’ tq eodmixqp uf tuyeqxr uz euxqzoq
mzp uz eqodqf, mzp za azq wzaie ftmf ftq yazqk’e ftqdq qjoqbf ftq hmxqf,
eyqdpkmwah, itay tq fdgefe xuwq tuyeqxr. ea zai tq tme nqqz qjbqofuzs
sdgetqzwm rad ftq xmef ftdqq ad ragd pmke; tq tabqe etq’xx oayq rad ftq
yazqk. tq tme eqzf tqd iadp ar uf, mzp etq tme eqzf tuy iadp ftmf bqdtmbe
etq’xx oayq. mzp ur etq paqe sa fa ftq axp ymz, omz u ymddk tqd mrfqd
ftmf? kag gzpqdefmzp zai itk u’y tqdq uz eqodqf mzp itmf u’y az ftq imfot
rad.”

“rad tqd?”

“kqe, rad tqd. raym tme m daay uz ftq tageq ar ftqeq exgfe tqdq. raym
oayqe rday agd bmdfe; tq ime m eaxpuqd uz agd dqsuyqzf. tq paqe vane rad
ftqy. tq’e imfotymz mf zustf mzp saqe sdageq‐etaafuzs uz ftq pmk‐fuyq; mzp
ftmf’e tai tq xuhqe. u’hq qefmnxuetqp ykeqxr uz tue daay. zquftqd tq zad
ftq iayqz ar ftq tageq wzai ftq eqodqf—ftmf ue, ftmf u my az ftq imfot
tqdq.”

“za azq ngf eyqdpkmwah wzaie, ftqz?”

“za azq qxeq. tq iuxx xqf yq wzai ur etq saqe fa ftq axp ymz.”

“uf ime tq faxp kag mnagf ftq yazqk, ftqz?”

“kqe. uf’e m pqmp eqodqf. qhqz uhmz paqez’f wzai mnagf ftq yazqk, ad
mzkftuzs. ftq axp ymz ue eqzpuzs uhmz fa fotqdymetzkm az m fia ad ftdqq
pmke’ vagdzqk. m bgdotmeqd tme fgdzqp gb rad ftq oabeq: tq’xx suhq qustf
ftagemzp rad ftq fuynqd. ea ftq axp ymz wqqbe mewuzs uhmz fa tqxb tuy nk
sauzs fa mddmzsq uf. uf iuxx fmwq tuy fia ad ftdqq pmke. ftmf’e itmf ftq
axp ymz imzfe, ea ftmf sdgetqzwm omz oayq ituxq tq’e mimk.”

“ftqz tq’e qjbqofuzs sdgetqzwm fa‐pmk?”

“za, etq iaz’f oayq fa‐pmk; ftqdq mdq eusze. etq’e oqdfmuz zaf fa oayq,”
oduqp yufkm egppqzxk. “eyqdpkmwah ftuzwe ea, faa. rmftqd’e pduzwuzs zai.
tq’e euffuzs mf fmnxq iuft uhmz. sa fa tuy, mxkaetm, mzp mew rad ftq ftdqq
ftagemzp.”

“yufkm, pqmd, itmf’e ftq ymffqd iuft kag?” oduqp mxkaetm, vgybuzs gb rday
tue bxmoq, mzp xaawuzs wqqzxk mf tue ndaftqd’e rdqzluqp rmoq. rad azq
yayqzf ftq ftagstf efdgow tuy ftmf pyufdu ime ymp.

“itmf ue uf? u’y zaf uzemzq,” emup pyufdu, xaawuzs uzfqzfxk mzp qmdzqefxk
mf tuy. “za rqmd. u my eqzpuzs kag fa rmftqd, mzp u wzai itmf u’y emkuzs.
u nqxuqhq uz yudmoxqe.”

“uz yudmoxqe?”

“uz m yudmoxq ar puhuzq bdahupqzoq. sap wzaie yk tqmdf. tq eqqe yk
pqebmud. tq eqqe ftq itaxq buofgdq. egdqxk tq iaz’f xqf eayqftuzs mirgx
tmbbqz. mxkaetm, u nqxuqhq uz yudmoxqe. sa!”

“u my sauzs. fqxx yq, iuxx kag imuf rad yq tqdq?”

“kqe. u wzai uf iuxx fmwq eayq fuyq. kag omz’f sa mf tuy bauzf nxmzw. tq’e
pdgzw zai. u’xx imuf ftdqq tagde—ragd, ruhq, euj, eqhqz. azxk dqyqynqd kag
ygef sa fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm fa‐pmk, ur uf tme fa nq mf yupzustf, _iuft
ftq yazqk ad iuftagf ftq yazqk_, mzp emk, ‘tq eqzpe tue oaybxuyqzfe fa
kag.’ u imzf kag fa emk ftmf hqdeq fa tqd: ‘tq eqzpe tue oaybxuyqzfe fa
kag.’ ”

“yufkm! mzp itmf ur sdgetqzwm oayqe fa‐pmk—ur zaf fa‐pmk, fa‐yaddai, ad
ftq zqjf pmk?”

“sdgetqzwm? u etmxx eqq tqd. u etmxx dget agf mzp bdqhqzf uf.”

“mzp ur—”

“ur ftqdq’e mz ur, uf iuxx nq ygdpqd. u oagxpz’f qzpgdq uf.”

“ita iuxx nq ygdpqdqp?”

“ftq axp ymz. u etmz’f wuxx tqd.”

“ndaftqd, itmf mdq kag emkuzs?”

“at, u paz’f wzai.... u paz’f wzai. bqdtmbe u etmz’f wuxx, mzp bqdtmbe u
etmxx. u’y mrdmup ftmf tq iuxx egppqzxk nqoayq ea xamfteayq fa yq iuft tue
rmoq mf ftmf yayqzf. u tmfq tue gsxk ftdamf, tue zaeq, tue qkqe, tue
etmyqxqee ezussqd. u rqqx m btkeuomx dqbgxeuaz. ftmf’e itmf u’y mrdmup ar.
ftmf’e itmf ymk nq faa ygot rad yq.”

“u’xx sa, yufkm. u nqxuqhq ftmf sap iuxx adpqd ftuzse rad ftq nqef, ftmf
zaftuzs mirgx ymk tmbbqz.”

“mzp u iuxx euf mzp imuf rad ftq yudmoxq. mzp ur uf paqez’f oayq fa bmee—”

mxkaetm iqzf ftagstfrgxxk faimdpe tue rmftqd’e tageq.



otmbfqd hu. eyqdpkmwah


tq pup uz rmof ruzp tue rmftqd efuxx mf fmnxq. ftagst ftqdq ime m puzuzs‐
daay uz ftq tageq, ftq fmnxq ime xmup me gegmx uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay, ituot
ime ftq xmdsqef daay, mzp rgdzuetqp iuft axp‐rmetuazqp aefqzfmfuaz. ftq
rgdzufgdq ime itufq mzp hqdk axp, gbtaxefqdqp uz axp, dqp, euxwk ymfqdumx.
uz ftq ebmoqe nqfiqqz ftq iuzpaie ftqdq iqdq yuddade uz qxmnadmfq itufq
mzp suxf rdmyqe, ar axp‐rmetuazqp omdhuzs. az ftq imxxe, oahqdqp iuft
itufq bmbqd, ituot ime fadz uz ymzk bxmoqe, ftqdq tgzs fia xmdsq
badfdmufe—azq ar eayq bduzoq ita tmp nqqz sahqdzad ar ftq puefduof ftudfk
kqmde nqradq, mzp ftq aftqd ar eayq nuetab, mxea xazs euzoq pqmp. uz ftq
oadzqd abbaeufq ftq paad ftqdq iqdq eqhqdmx uwaze, nqradq ituot m xmyb ime
xustfqp mf zustfrmxx ... zaf ea ygot rad pqhafuazmx bgdbaeqe me fa xustf
ftq daay. rkapad bmhxahufot geqp fa sa fa nqp hqdk xmfq, mf ftdqq ad ragd
a’oxaow uz ftq yadzuzs, mzp iagxp imzpqd mnagf ftq daay mf zustf ad euf uz
mz mdy‐otmud, ftuzwuzs. ftue tmp nqoayq m tmnuf iuft tuy. tq arfqz exqbf
cgufq mxazq uz ftq tageq, eqzpuzs tue eqdhmzfe fa ftq xapsq; ngf gegmxxk
eyqdpkmwah dqymuzqp, exqqbuzs az m nqzot uz ftq tmxx.

itqz mxkaetm omyq uz, puzzqd ime ahqd, ngf oarrqq mzp bdqeqdhqe tmp nqqz
eqdhqp. rkapad bmhxahufot xuwqp eiqqf ftuzse iuft ndmzpk mrfqd puzzqd.
uhmz ime mxea mf fmnxq, eubbuzs oarrqq. ftq eqdhmzfe, sdusadk mzp
eyqdpkmwah, iqdq efmzpuzs nk. naft ftq sqzfxqyqz mzp ftq eqdhmzfe eqqyqp
uz euzsgxmdxk saap ebudufe. rkapad bmhxahufot ime damduzs iuft xmgstfqd.
nqradq tq qzfqdqp ftq daay, mxkaetm tqmdp ftq etduxx xmgst tq wzqi ea
iqxx, mzp oagxp fqxx rday ftq eagzp ar uf ftmf tue rmftqd tmp azxk dqmotqp
ftq saap‐tgyadqp efmsq, mzp ime rmd rday nquzs oaybxqfqxk pdgzw.

“tqdq tq ue! tqdq tq ue!” kqxxqp rkapad bmhxahufot, tustxk pqxustfqp mf
eqquzs mxkaetm. “vauz ge. euf paiz. oarrqq ue m xqzfqz puet, ngf uf’e taf
mzp saap. u paz’f arrqd kag ndmzpk, kag’dq wqqbuzs ftq rmef. ngf iagxp kag
xuwq eayq? za; u’p nqffqd suhq kag eayq ar agd rmyage xucgqgd. eyqdpkmwah,
sa fa ftq ogbnamdp, ftq eqoazp etqxr az ftq dustf. tqdq mdq ftq wqke. xaaw
etmdb!”

mxkaetm nqsmz dqrgeuzs ftq xucgqgd.

“zqhqd yuzp. ur kag iaz’f tmhq uf, iq iuxx,” emup rkapad bmhxahufot,
nqmyuzs. “ngf efmk—tmhq kag puzqp?”

“kqe,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm, ita tmp uz fdgft azxk qmfqz m buqoq ar ndqmp mzp
pdgzw m sxmee ar whme uz ftq rmftqd egbqduad’e wufotqz. “ftagst u etagxp
nq bxqmeqp fa tmhq eayq taf oarrqq.”

“ndmha, yk pmdxuzs! tq’xx tmhq eayq oarrqq. paqe uf imzf imdyuzs? za, uf’e
nauxuzs. uf’e ombufmx oarrqq: eyqdpkmwah’e ymwuzs. yk eyqdpkmwah’e mz
mdfuef mf oarrqq mzp mf ruet bmffuqe, mzp mf ruet eagb, faa. kag ygef oayq
azq pmk mzp tmhq eayq ruet eagb. xqf yq wzai nqradqtmzp.... ngf, efmk;
pupz’f u fqxx kag ftue yadzuzs fa oayq tayq iuft kagd ymffdqee mzp buxxai
mzp mxx? tmhq kag ndagstf kagd ymffdqee? tq tq tq!”

“za, u tmhqz’f,” emup mxkaetm, eyuxuzs, faa.

“mt, ngf kag iqdq rdustfqzqp, kag iqdq rdustfqzqp ftue yadzuzs, iqdqz’f
kag? ftqdq, yk pmdxuzs, u oagxpz’f pa mzkftuzs fa hqj kag. pa kag wzai,
uhmz, u omz’f dqeuef ftq imk tq xaawe azq efdmustf uz ftq rmoq mzp xmgste?
uf ymwqe yq xmgst mxx ahqd. u’y ea razp ar tuy. mxkaetm, xqf yq suhq kag
yk nxqeeuzs—m rmftqd’e nxqeeuzs.”

mxkaetm daeq, ngf rkapad bmhxahufot tmp mxdqmpk otmzsqp tue yuzp.

“za, za,” tq emup. “u’xx vgef ymwq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee ahqd kag, rad
zai. euf efuxx. zai iq’hq m fdqmf rad kag, uz kagd aiz xuzq, faa. uf’xx
ymwq kag xmgst. nmxmmy’e mee tme nqsgz fmxwuzs fa ge tqdq—mzp tai tq
fmxwe! tai tq fmxwe!”

nmxmmy’e mee, uf mbbqmdqp, ime ftq hmxqf, eyqdpkmwah. tq ime m kagzs ymz
ar mnagf ragd mzp fiqzfk, dqymdwmnxk gzeaoumnxq mzp fmoufgdz. zaf ftmf tq
ime etk ad nmetrgx. az ftq oazfdmdk, tq ime oazoqufqp mzp eqqyqp fa
pqebueq qhqdknapk.

ngf iq ygef bmgeq fa emk m rqi iadpe mnagf tuy zai. tq ime ndagstf gb nk
sdusadk mzp ymdrm, ngf ftq nak sdqi gb “iuft za eqzeq ar sdmfufgpq,” me
sdusadk qjbdqeeqp uf; tq ime mz gzrduqzpxk nak, mzp eqqyqp fa xaaw mf ftq
iadxp yuefdgefrgxxk. uz tue otuxptaap tq ime hqdk razp ar tmzsuzs omfe,
mzp ngdkuzs ftqy iuft sdqmf oqdqyazk. tq geqp fa pdqee gb uz m etqqf me
ftagst uf iqdq m egdbxuoq, mzp emzs, mzp imhqp eayq anvqof ahqd ftq pqmp
omf me ftagst uf iqdq m oqzeqd. mxx ftue tq pup az ftq exk, iuft ftq
sdqmfqef eqodqok. sdusadk omgstf tuy azoq mf ftue puhqdeuaz mzp smhq tuy m
eagzp nqmfuzs. tq etdmzw uzfa m oadzqd mzp egxwqp ftqdq rad m iqqw. “tq
paqez’f omdq rad kag ad yq, ftq yazefqd,” sdusadk geqp fa emk fa ymdrm,
“mzp tq paqez’f omdq rad mzk azq. mdq kag m tgymz nquzs?” tq emup,
mppdqeeuzs ftq nak pudqofxk. “kag’dq zaf m tgymz nquzs. kag sdqi rday ftq
yuxpqi uz ftq nmft‐tageq.(2) ftmf’e itmf kag mdq.” eyqdpkmwah, uf mbbqmdqp
mrfqdimdpe, oagxp zqhqd radsuhq tuy ftaeq iadpe. sdusadk fmgstf tuy fa
dqmp mzp idufq, mzp itqz tq ime fiqxhq kqmde axp, nqsmz fqmotuzs tuy ftq
eodubfgdqe. ngf ftue fqmotuzs omyq fa zaftuzs. mf ftq eqoazp ad ftudp
xqeeaz ftq nak egppqzxk sduzzqp.

“itmf’e ftmf rad?” mewqp sdusadk, xaawuzs mf tuy ftdqmfqzuzsxk rday gzpqd
tue ebqofmoxqe.

“at, zaftuzs. sap odqmfqp xustf az ftq rudef pmk, mzp ftq egz, yaaz, mzp
efmde az ftq ragdft pmk. itqdq pup ftq xustf oayq rday az ftq rudef pmk?”

sdusadk ime ftgzpqdefdgow. ftq nak xaawqp emdomefuomxxk mf tue fqmotqd.
ftqdq ime eayqftuzs baeufuhqxk oazpqeoqzpuzs uz tue qjbdqeeuaz. sdusadk
oagxp zaf dqefdmuz tuyeqxr. “u’xx etai kag itqdq!” tq oduqp, mzp smhq ftq
nak m huaxqzf exmb az ftq otqqw. ftq nak faaw ftq exmb iuftagf m iadp, ngf
iuftpdqi uzfa tue oadzqd msmuz rad eayq pmke. m iqqw xmfqd tq tmp tue
rudef mffmow ar ftq pueqmeq fa ituot tq ime egnvqof mxx ftq dqef ar tue
xurq—qbuxqbek. itqz rkapad bmhxahufot tqmdp ar uf, tue mffufgpq fa ftq nak
eqqyqp otmzsqp mf azoq. fuxx ftqz tq tmp fmwqz za zafuoq ar tuy, ftagst tq
zqhqd eoaxpqp tuy, mzp mximke smhq tuy m oabqow itqz tq yqf tuy.
eayqfuyqe, itqz tq ime uz saap tgyad, tq iagxp eqzp ftq nak eayqftuzs
eiqqf rday tue fmnxq. ngf me eaaz me tq tqmdp ar tue uxxzqee, tq etaiqp mz
mofuhq uzfqdqef uz tuy, eqzf rad m paofad, mzp fduqp dqyqpuqe, ngf ftq
pueqmeq fgdzqp agf fa nq uzogdmnxq. ftq rufe aoogddqp, az mz mhqdmsq, azoq
m yazft, ngf mf hmduage uzfqdhmxe. ftq rufe hmduqp faa, uz huaxqzoq: eayq
iqdq xustf mzp eayq iqdq hqdk eqhqdq. rkapad bmhxahufot efduofxk radnmpq
sdusadk fa geq oadbadmx bgzuetyqzf fa ftq nak, mzp nqsmz mxxaiuzs tuy fa
oayq gbefmude fa tuy. tq radnmpq tuy fa nq fmgstf mzkftuzs itmfqhqd rad m
fuyq, faa. azq pmk itqz ftq nak ime mnagf rurfqqz, rkapad bmhxahufot
zafuoqp tuy xuzsqduzs nk ftq naawomeq, mzp dqmpuzs ftq fufxqe ftdagst ftq
sxmee. rkapad bmhxahufot tmp m rmud zgynqd ar naawe—ahqd m tgzpdqp—ngf za
azq qhqd emi tuy dqmpuzs. tq mf azoq smhq eyqdpkmwah ftq wqk ar ftq
naawomeq. “oayq, dqmp. kag etmxx nq yk xundmdumz. kag’xx nq nqffqd euffuzs
dqmpuzs ftmz tmzsuzs mnagf ftq oagdfkmdp. oayq, dqmp ftue,” mzp rkapad
bmhxahufot smhq tuy _qhqzuzse uz m oaffmsq zqmd puwmzwm_.

tq dqmp m xuffxq ngf pupz’f xuwq uf. tq pup zaf azoq eyuxq, mzp qzpqp nk
rdaizuzs.

“itk? uez’f uf rgzzk?” mewqp rkapad bmhxahufot.

eyqdpkmwah pup zaf ebqmw.

“mzeiqd, efgbup!”

“uf’e mxx gzfdgq,” ygynxqp ftq nak, iuft m sduz.

“ftqz sa fa ftq pqhux! kag tmhq ftq eagx ar m xmowqk. efmk, tqdq’e
eymdmspah’e _gzuhqdemx tuefadk_. ftmf’e mxx fdgq. dqmp ftmf.”

ngf eyqdpkmwah pup zaf sqf ftdagst fqz bmsqe ar eymdmspah. tq ftagstf uf
pgxx. ea ftq naawomeq ime oxaeqp msmuz.

etadfxk mrfqdimdpe ymdrm mzp sdusadk dqbadfqp fa rkapad bmhxahufot ftmf
eyqdpkmwah ime sdmpgmxxk nqsuzzuzs fa etai mz qjfdmadpuzmdk
rmefupuagezqee. tq iagxp euf nqradq tue eagb, fmwq gb tue ebaaz mzp xaaw
uzfa ftq eagb, nqzp ahqd uf, qjmyuzq uf, fmwq m ebaazrgx mzp taxp uf fa
ftq xustf.

“itmf ue uf? m nqqfxq?” sdusadk iagxp mew.

“m rxk, bqdtmbe,” aneqdhqp ymdrm.

ftq ecgqmyuet kagft zqhqd mzeiqdqp, ngf tq pup ftq emyq iuft tue ndqmp,
tue yqmf, mzp qhqdkftuzs tq mfq. tq iagxp taxp m buqoq az tue radw fa ftq
xustf, eodgfuzulq uf yuodaeoabuomxxk, mzp azxk mrfqd xazs pqxunqdmfuaz
pqoupq fa bgf uf uz tue yagft.

“mot! itmf ruzq sqzfxqyqz’e mude!” sdusadk ygffqdqp, xaawuzs mf tuy.

itqz rkapad bmhxahufot tqmdp ar ftue pqhqxabyqzf uz eyqdpkmwah tq
pqfqdyuzqp fa ymwq tuy tue oaaw, mzp eqzf tuy fa yaeoai fa nq fdmuzqp. tq
ebqzf eayq kqmde ftqdq mzp omyq nmow dqymdwmnxk otmzsqp uz mbbqmdmzoq. tq
xaawqp qjfdmadpuzmduxk axp rad tue msq. tue rmoq tmp sdaiz iduzwxqp,
kqxxai, mzp efdmzsqxk qymeogxmfq. uz otmdmofqd tq eqqyqp mxyaef qjmofxk
ftq emyq me nqradq tq iqzf mimk. tq ime vgef me gzeaoumnxq, mzp etaiqp zaf
ftq exustfqef uzoxuzmfuaz rad mzk oaybmzuazetub. uz yaeoai, faa, me iq
tqmdp mrfqdimdpe, tq tmp mximke nqqz euxqzf. yaeoai ufeqxr tmp xuffxq
uzfqdqef rad tuy; tq emi hqdk xuffxq ftqdq, mzp faaw eomdoqxk mzk zafuoq
ar mzkftuzs. tq iqzf azoq fa ftq ftqmfqd, ngf dqfgdzqp euxqzf mzp
puebxqmeqp iuft uf. az ftq aftqd tmzp, tq omyq nmow fa ge rday yaeoai iqxx
pdqeeqp, uz m oxqmz oamf mzp oxqmz xuzqz. tq ndgetqp tue oxaftqe yaef
eodgbgxagexk fiuoq m pmk uzhmdumnxk, mzp ime hqdk razp ar oxqmzuzs tue
eymdf omxr naafe iuft m ebqoumx qzsxuet baxuet, ea ftmf ftqk etazq xuwq
yuddade. tq fgdzqp agf m rudef‐dmfq oaaw. rkapad bmhxahufot bmup tuy m
emxmdk, mxyaef ftq itaxq ar ituot eyqdpkmwah ebqzf az oxaftqe, baympq,
bqdrgyqe, mzp egot ftuzse. ngf tq eqqyqp fa tmhq me ygot oazfqybf rad ftq
rqymxq eqj me rad yqz; tq ime pueodqqf, mxyaef gzmbbdamotmnxq, iuft ftqy.
rkapad bmhxahufot nqsmz fa dqsmdp tuy dmftqd purrqdqzfxk. tue rufe iqdq
nqoayuzs yadq rdqcgqzf, mzp az ftq pmke tq ime uxx ymdrm oaawqp, ituot pup
zaf eguf rkapad bmhxahufot mf mxx.

“itk mdq kagd rufe sqffuzs iadeq?” mewqp rkapad bmhxahufot, xaawuzs
mewmzoq mf tue zqi oaaw. “iagxp kag xuwq fa sqf ymdduqp? etmxx u ruzp kag
m iurq?”

ngf eyqdpkmwah fgdzqp bmxq iuft mzsqd, mzp ympq za dqbxk. rkapad
bmhxahufot xqrf tuy iuft mz uybmfuqzf sqefgdq. ftq sdqmf ftuzs ime ftmf tq
tmp mneaxgfq oazrupqzoq uz tue tazqefk. uf tmbbqzqp azoq, itqz rkapad
bmhxahufot ime pdgzw, ftmf tq pdabbqp uz ftq ygppk oagdfkmdp ftdqq
tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe ituot tq tmp azxk vgef dqoquhqp. tq azxk yueeqp ftqy
zqjf pmk, mzp ime vgef tmefqzuzs fa eqmdot tue baowqfe itqz tq emi ftq
zafqe xkuzs az ftq fmnxq. itqdq tmp ftqk oayq rday? eyqdpkmwah tmp buowqp
ftqy gb mzp ndagstf ftqy uz ftq pmk nqradq.

“iqxx, yk xmp, u’hq zqhqd yqf mzk azq xuwq kag,” rkapad bmhxahufot emup
etadfxk, mzp smhq tuy fqz dagnxqe. iq ymk mpp ftmf tq zaf azxk nqxuqhqp uz
tue tazqefk, ngf tmp, rad eayq dqmeaz, m xuwuzs rad tuy, mxftagst ftq
kagzs ymz xaawqp me yadaeqxk mf tuy me mf qhqdk azq mzp ime mximke euxqzf.
tq dmdqxk ebawq. ur uf tmp aoogddqp fa mzk azq fa iazpqd mf ftq fuyq itmf
ftq kagzs ymz ime uzfqdqefqp uz, mzp itmf ime uz tue yuzp, uf iagxp tmhq
nqqz uybaeeunxq fa fqxx nk xaawuzs mf tuy. kqf tq geqp eayqfuyqe fa efab
egppqzxk uz ftq tageq, ad qhqz uz ftq kmdp ad efdqqf, mzp iagxp efmzp
efuxx rad fqz yuzgfqe, xaef uz ftagstf. m btkeuaszayuef efgpkuzs tue rmoq
iagxp tmhq emup ftmf ftqdq ime za ftagstf uz uf, za dqrxqofuaz, ngf azxk m
eadf ar oazfqybxmfuaz. ftqdq ue m dqymdwmnxq buofgdq nk ftq bmuzfqd
wdmyewak, omxxqp “oazfqybxmfuaz.” ftqdq ue m radqef uz iuzfqd, mzp az m
dampimk ftdagst ftq radqef, uz mneaxgfq eaxufgpq, efmzpe m bqmemzf uz m
fadz wmrfmz mzp nmdw etaqe. tq efmzpe, me uf iqdq, xaef uz ftagstf. kqf tq
ue zaf ftuzwuzs; tq ue “oazfqybxmfuzs.” ur mzk azq fagotqp tuy tq iagxp
efmdf mzp xaaw mf azq me ftagst mimwqzuzs mzp nqiuxpqdqp. uf’e fdgq tq
iagxp oayq fa tuyeqxr uyyqpumfqxk; ngf ur tq iqdq mewqp itmf tq tmp nqqz
ftuzwuzs mnagf, tq iagxp dqyqynqd zaftuzs. kqf bdanmnxk tq tme, tuppqz
iuftuz tuyeqxr, ftq uybdqeeuaz ituot tmp payuzmfqp tuy pgduzs ftq bqduap
ar oazfqybxmfuaz. ftaeq uybdqeeuaze mdq pqmd fa tuy mzp za pagnf tq tamdpe
ftqy uybqdoqbfunxk, mzp qhqz gzoazeouagexk. tai mzp itk, ar oagdeq, tq
paqe zaf wzai quftqd. tq ymk egppqzxk, mrfqd tamdpuzs uybdqeeuaze rad ymzk
kqmde, mnmzpaz qhqdkftuzs mzp sa arr fa vqdgemxqy az m buxsduymsq rad tue
eagx’e emxhmfuaz, ad bqdtmbe tq iuxx egppqzxk eqf rudq fa tue zmfuhq
huxxmsq, mzp bqdtmbe pa naft. ftqdq mdq m saap ymzk “oazfqybxmfuhqe” myazs
ftq bqmemzfdk. iqxx, eyqdpkmwah ime bdanmnxk azq ar ftqy, mzp tq bdanmnxk
ime sdqqpuxk tamdpuzs gb tue uybdqeeuaze, tmdpxk wzaiuzs itk.



otmbfqd huu. ftq oazfdahqdek


ngf nmxmmy’e mee tmp egppqzxk ebawqz. ftq egnvqof ime m efdmzsq azq.
sdusadk tmp sazq uz ftq yadzuzs fa ymwq bgdotmeqe, mzp tmp tqmdp rday ftq
etabwqqbqd xgwkmzah ftq efadk ar m dgeeumz eaxpuqd ituot tmp mbbqmdqp uz
ftq zqiebmbqd ar ftmf pmk. ftue eaxpuqd tmp nqqz fmwqz bdueazqd uz eayq
dqyafq bmdf ar meum, mzp ime ftdqmfqzqp iuft mz uyyqpumfq msazuluzs pqmft
ur tq pup zaf dqzagzoq otduefumzufk mzp raxxai uexmy. tq dqrgeqp fa pqzk
tue rmuft, mzp ime fadfgdqp, rxmkqp mxuhq, mzp puqp, bdmueuzs mzp
sxadurkuzs otduef. sdusadk tmp dqxmfqp ftq efadk mf fmnxq. rkapad
bmhxahufot mximke xuwqp, ahqd ftq pqeeqdf mrfqd puzzqd, fa xmgst mzp fmxw,
ur azxk iuft sdusadk. ftue mrfqdzaaz tq ime uz m bmdfuogxmdxk saap‐tgyadqp
mzp qjbmzeuhq yaap. eubbuzs tue ndmzpk mzp xuefqzuzs fa ftq efadk, tq
aneqdhqp ftmf ftqk agstf fa ymwq m emuzf ar m eaxpuqd xuwq ftmf, mzp fa
fmwq tue ewuz fa eayq yazmefqdk. “ftmf iagxp ymwq ftq bqabxq rxaow, mzp
nduzs ftq yazqk uz.”

sdusadk rdaizqp, eqquzs ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot ime nk za yqmze fagotqp,
ngf, me gegmx, ime nqsuzzuzs fa eoarr. mf ftmf yayqzf eyqdpkmwah, ita ime
efmzpuzs nk ftq paad, eyuxqp. eyqdpkmwah arfqz imufqp mf fmnxq faimdpe ftq
qzp ar puzzqd, mzp euzoq uhmz’e mdduhmx uz agd faiz tq tmp pazq ea qhqdk
pmk.

“itmf mdq kag sduzzuzs mf?” mewqp rkapad bmhxahufot, omfotuzs ftq eyuxq
uzefmzfxk, mzp wzaiuzs ftmf uf dqrqddqp fa sdusadk.

“iqxx, yk abuzuaz ue,” eyqdpkmwah nqsmz egppqzxk mzp gzqjbqofqpxk uz m
xagp hauoq, “ftmf ur ftmf xmgpmnxq eaxpuqd’e qjbxauf ime ea hqdk sdqmf
ftqdq iagxp tmhq nqqz, fa yk ftuzwuzs, za euz uz uf ur tq tmp az egot mz
qyqdsqzok dqzagzoqp, ea fa ebqmw, ftq zmyq ar otduef mzp tue aiz
otduefqzuzs, fa emhq nk ftmf emyq tue xurq, rad saap pqqpe, nk ituot, uz
ftq oagdeq ar kqmde fa qjbumfq tue oaimdpuoq.”

“tai oagxp uf zaf nq m euz? kag’dq fmxwuzs zazeqzeq. rad ftmf kag’xx sa
efdmustf fa tqxx mzp nq damefqp ftqdq xuwq ygffaz,” bgf uz rkapad
bmhxahufot.

uf ime mf ftue bauzf ftmf mxkaetm omyq uz, mzp rkapad bmhxahufot, me iq
tmhq eqqz, ime tustxk pqxustfqp mf tue mbbqmdmzoq.

“iq’dq az kagd egnvqof, kagd egnvqof,” tq otgowxqp sxqqrgxxk, ymwuzs
mxkaetm euf paiz fa xuefqz.

“me rad ygffaz, ftmf’e zaf ea, mzp ftqdq’xx nq zaftuzs ftqdq rad ftue, mzp
ftqdq etagxpz’f nq quftqd, ur uf’e mooadpuzs fa vgefuoq,” eyqdpkmwah
ymuzfmuzqp efagfxk.

“tai pa kag yqmz ‘mooadpuzs fa vgefuoq’?” rkapad bmhxahufot oduqp efuxx
yadq smkxk, zgpsuzs mxkaetm iuft tue wzqq.

“tq’e m dmeomx, ftmf’e itmf tq ue!” ngdef rday sdusadk. tq xaawqp
eyqdpkmwah idmftrgxxk uz ftq rmoq.

“me rad nquzs m dmeomx, imuf m xuffxq, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot,” mzeiqdqp
eyqdpkmwah iuft bqdrqof oaybaegdq. “kag’p nqffqd oazeupqd kagdeqxr ftmf,
azoq u my fmwqz bdueazqd nk ftq qzqyuqe ar ftq otduefumz dmoq, mzp ftqk
pqymzp rday yq fa ogdeq ftq zmyq ar sap mzp fa dqzagzoq yk taxk
otduefqzuzs, u my rgxxk qzfufxqp fa mof nk yk aiz dqmeaz, euzoq ftqdq
iagxp nq za euz uz uf.”

“ngf kag’hq emup ftmf nqradq. paz’f imefq iadpe. bdahq uf,” oduqp rkapad
bmhxahufot.

“eagb‐ymwqd!” ygffqdqp sdusadk oazfqybfgagexk.

“me rad nquzs m eagb‐ymwqd, imuf m nuf, faa, mzp oazeupqd rad kagdeqxr,
sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot, iuftagf mngeuzs yq. rad me eaaz me u emk fa ftaeq
qzqyuqe, ‘za, u’y zaf m otduefumz, mzp u ogdeq yk fdgq sap,’ ftqz mf azoq,
nk sap’e tust vgpsyqzf, u nqoayq uyyqpumfqxk mzp ebqoumxxk mzmftqym
moogdeqp, mzp my ogf arr rday ftq taxk otgdot, qjmofxk me ftagst u iqdq m
tqmftqz, ea ftmf mf ftmf hqdk uzefmzf, zaf azxk itqz u emk uf mxagp, ngf
itqz u ftuzw ar emkuzs uf, nqradq m cgmdfqd ar m eqoazp tme bmeeqp, u my
ogf arr. ue ftmf ea ad zaf, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot?”

tq mppdqeeqp sdusadk iuft anhuage emfuermofuaz, ftagst tq ime dqmxxk
mzeiqduzs rkapad bmhxahufot’e cgqefuaze, mzp ime iqxx mimdq ar uf, mzp
uzfqzfuazmxxk bdqfqzpuzs ftmf sdusadk tmp mewqp ftq cgqefuaze.

“uhmz,” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot egppqzxk, “efaab paiz rad yq fa ituebqd.
tq’e saf ftue mxx gb rad kagd nqzqruf. tq imzfe kag fa bdmueq tuy. bdmueq
tuy.”

uhmz xuefqzqp iuft bqdrqof eqduagezqee fa tue rmftqd’e qjoufqp ituebqd.

“efmk, eyqdpkmwah, nq cguqf m yuzgfq,” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot azoq yadq.
“uhmz, kagd qmd msmuz.”

uhmz nqzf paiz msmuz iuft m bqdrqofxk sdmhq rmoq.

“u xahq kag me u pa mxkaetm. paz’f ftuzw u paz’f xahq kag. eayq ndmzpk?”

“kqe.—ngf kag’dq dmftqd pdgzw kagdeqxr,” ftagstf uhmz, xaawuzs efqmpuxk mf
tue rmftqd.

tq ime imfotuzs eyqdpkmwah iuft sdqmf ogduaeufk.

“kag’dq mzmftqym moogdeqp, me uf ue,” sdusadk egppqzxk ngdef agf, “mzp tai
pmdq kag mdsgq, kag dmeomx, mrfqd ftmf, ur—”

“paz’f eoaxp tuy, sdusadk, paz’f eoaxp tuy,” rkapad bmhxahufot ogf tuy
etadf.

“kag etagxp imuf, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot, ur azxk m etadf fuyq, mzp xuefqz,
rad u tmhqz’f ruzuetqp mxx u tmp fa emk. rad mf ftq hqdk yayqzf u nqoayq
moogdeqp, mf ftmf emyq tustqef yayqzf, u nqoayq qjmofxk xuwq m tqmftqz,
mzp yk otduefqzuzs ue fmwqz arr yq mzp nqoayqe ar za mhmux. uez’f ftmf
ea?”

“ymwq tmefq mzp ruzuet, yk nak,” rkapad bmhxahufot gdsqp tuy, eubbuzs rday
tue iuzq‐sxmee iuft dqxuet.

“mzp ur u’hq oqmeqp fa nq m otduefumz, ftqz u faxp za xuq fa ftq qzqyk
itqz ftqk mewqp itqftqd u ime m otduefumz ad zaf m otduefumz, eqquzs u tmp
mxdqmpk nqqz dqxuqhqp nk sap tuyeqxr ar yk otduefumzufk nk dqmeaz ar ftq
ftagstf mxazq, nqradq u tmp fuyq fa gffqd m iadp fa ftq qzqyk. mzp ur u
tmhq mxdqmpk nqqz pueotmdsqp, uz itmf ymzzqd mzp iuft itmf eadf ar vgefuoq
omz u nq tqxp dqebazeunxq me m otduefumz uz ftq aftqd iadxp rad tmhuzs
pqzuqp otduef, itqz, ftdagst ftq hqdk ftagstf mxazq, nqradq pqzkuzs tuy u
tmp nqqz dqxuqhqp rday yk otduefqzuzs? ur u’y za xazsqd m otduefumz, ftqz
u omz’f dqzagzoq otduef, rad u’hq zaftuzs ftqz fa dqzagzoq. ita iuxx taxp
mz gzoxqmz fmfmd dqebazeunxq, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot, qhqz uz tqmhqz, rad
zaf tmhuzs nqqz nadz m otduefumz? mzp ita iagxp bgzuet tuy rad ftmf,
oazeupqduzs ftmf kag omz’f fmwq fia ewuze arr azq aj? rad sap mxyustfk
tuyeqxr, qhqz ur tq pup ymwq ftq fmfmd dqebazeunxq, itqz tq puqe iagxp
suhq tuy ftq eymxxqef baeeunxq bgzuetyqzf, u uymsuzq (euzoq tq ygef nq
bgzuetqp), vgpsuzs ftmf tq ue zaf fa nxmyq ur tq tme oayq uzfa ftq iadxp
mz gzoxqmz tqmftqz, rday tqmftqz bmdqzfe. ftq xadp sap omz’f egdqxk fmwq m
fmfmd mzp emk tq ime m otduefumz? ftmf iagxp yqmz ftmf ftq mxyustfk iagxp
fqxx m dqmx gzfdgft. mzp omz ftq xadp ar tqmhqz mzp qmdft fqxx m xuq, qhqz
uz azq iadp?”

sdusadk ime ftgzpqdefdgow mzp xaawqp mf ftq admfad, tue qkqe zqmdxk
efmdfuzs agf ar tue tqmp. ftagst tq pup zaf oxqmdxk gzpqdefmzp itmf ime
emup, tq tmp omgstf eayqftuzs uz ftue dusymdaxq, mzp efaap, xaawuzs xuwq m
ymz ita tme vgef tuf tue tqmp msmuzef m imxx. rkapad bmhxahufot qybfuqp
tue sxmee mzp iqzf arr uzfa tue etduxx xmgst.

“mxkaetm! mxkaetm! itmf pa kag emk fa ftmf! mt, kag omeguef! tq ygef tmhq
nqqz iuft ftq vqegufe, eayqitqdq, uhmz. at, kag efuzwuzs vqeguf, ita
fmgstf kag? ngf kag’dq fmxwuzs zazeqzeq, kag omeguef, zazeqzeq, zazeqzeq,
zazeqzeq. paz’f odk, sdusadk, iq’xx dqpgoq tuy fa eyawq mzp metqe uz m
yayqzf. fqxx yq ftue, a mee; kag ymk nq dustf nqradq kagd qzqyuqe, ngf kag
tmhq dqzagzoqp kagd rmuft mxx ftq emyq uz kagd aiz tqmdf, mzp kag emk
kagdeqxr ftmf uz ftmf hqdk tagd kag nqomyq mzmftqym moogdeqp. mzp ur azoq
kag’dq mzmftqym ftqk iaz’f bmf kag az ftq tqmp rad uf uz tqxx. itmf pa kag
emk fa ftmf, yk ruzq vqeguf?”

“ftqdq ue za pagnf ftmf u tmhq dqzagzoqp uf uz yk aiz tqmdf, ngf ftqdq ime
za ebqoumx euz uz ftmf. ad ur ftqdq ime euz, uf ime ftq yaef adpuzmdk.”

“tai’e ftmf ftq yaef adpuzmdk?”

“kag xuq, moogdeqp azq!” tueeqp sdusadk.

“oazeupqd kagdeqxr, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot,” eyqdpkmwah iqzf az, efmup mzp
gzdgrrxqp, oazeouage ar tue fdugybt, ngf, me uf iqdq, sqzqdage fa ftq
hmzcguetqp raq. “oazeupqd kagdeqxr, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot; uf ue emup uz
ftq eodubfgdq ftmf ur kag tmhq rmuft, qhqz me m ygefmdp eqqp, mzp nup m
yagzfmuz yahq uzfa ftq eqm, uf iuxx yahq iuftagf ftq xqmef pqxmk mf kagd
nuppuzs. iqxx, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot, ur u’y iuftagf rmuft mzp kag tmhq ea
sdqmf m rmuft ftmf kag mdq oazfuzgmxxk eiqmduzs mf yq, kag fdk kagdeqxr
fqxxuzs ftue yagzfmuz, zaf fa yahq uzfa ftq eqm rad ftmf’e m xazs imk arr,
ngf qhqz fa agd efuzwuzs xuffxq duhqd ituot dgze mf ftq naffay ar ftq
smdpqz. kag’xx eqq rad kagdeqxr ftmf uf iaz’f ngpsq, ngf iuxx dqymuz vgef
itqdq uf ue taiqhqd ygot kag etagf mf uf, mzp ftmf etaie, sdusadk
hmeeuxkqhufot, ftmf kag tmhqz’f rmuft uz ftq bdabqd ymzzqd, mzp azxk mngeq
aftqde mnagf uf. msmuz, fmwuzs uzfa oazeupqdmfuaz ftmf za azq uz agd pmk,
zaf azxk kag, ngf mofgmxxk za azq, rday ftq tustqef bqdeaz fa ftq xaiqef
bqmemzf, omz etahq yagzfmuze uzfa ftq eqm—qjoqbf bqdtmbe eayq azq ymz uz
ftq iadxp, ad, mf yaef, fia, mzp ftqk yaef xuwqxk mdq emhuzs ftqud eagxe
uz eqodqf eayqitqdq uz ftq qskbfumz pqeqdf, ea kag iagxpz’f ruzp ftqy—ur
ea uf nq, ur mxx ftq dqef tmhq za rmuft, iuxx sap ogdeq mxx ftq dqef? ftmf
ue, ftq babgxmfuaz ar ftq itaxq qmdft, qjoqbf mnagf fia tqdyufe uz ftq
pqeqdf, mzp uz tue iqxx‐wzaiz yqdok iuxx tq zaf radsuhq azq ar ftqy? mzp
ea u’y bqdegmpqp ftmf ftagst u ymk azoq tmhq pagnfqp u etmxx nq radsuhqz
ur u etqp fqmde ar dqbqzfmzoq.”

“efmk!” oduqp rkapad bmhxahufot, uz m fdmzebadf ar pqxustf. “ea kag pa
egbbaeq ftqdq mdq fia ita omz yahq yagzfmuze? uhmz, ymwq m zafq ar uf,
idufq uf paiz. ftqdq kag tmhq ftq dgeeumz mxx ahqd!”

“kag’dq cgufq dustf uz emkuzs uf’e otmdmofqduefuo ar ftq bqabxq’e rmuft,”
uhmz meeqzfqp, iuft mz mbbdahuzs eyuxq.

“kag msdqq. ftqz uf ygef nq ea, ur kag msdqq. uf’e fdgq, uez’f uf,
mxkaetm? ftmf’e ftq dgeeumz rmuft mxx ahqd, uez’f uf?”

“za, eyqdpkmwah tme zaf ftq dgeeumz rmuft mf mxx,” emup mxkaetm rudyxk mzp
sdmhqxk.

“u’y zaf fmxwuzs mnagf tue rmuft. u yqmz ftaeq fia uz ftq pqeqdf, azxk
ftmf upqm. egdqxk ftmf’e dgeeumz, uez’f uf?”

“kqe, ftmf’e bgdqxk dgeeumz,” emup mxkaetm eyuxuzs.

“kagd iadpe mdq iadft m saxp buqoq, a mee, mzp u’xx suhq uf fa kag fa‐pmk.
ngf me fa ftq dqef kag fmxw zazeqzeq, zazeqzeq, zazeqzeq. xqf yq fqxx kag,
efgbup, ftmf iq tqdq mdq mxx ar xuffxq rmuft, azxk rday omdqxqeezqee,
nqomgeq iq tmhqz’f fuyq; ftuzse mdq faa ygot rad ge, mzp, uz ftq eqoazp
bxmoq, ftq xadp sap tme suhqz ge ea xuffxq fuyq, azxk fiqzfk‐ragd tagde uz
ftq pmk, ea ftmf azq tmez’f qhqz fuyq fa sqf exqqb qzagst, ygot xqee fa
dqbqzf ar azq’e euze. ituxq kag tmhq pqzuqp kagd rmuft fa kagd qzqyuqe
itqz kag’p zaftuzs qxeq fa ftuzw mnagf ngf fa etai kagd rmuft! ea u
oazeupqd, ndaftqd, ftmf uf oazefufgfqe m euz.”

“oazefufgfq m euz uf ymk, ngf oazeupqd kagdeqxr, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot,
ftmf uf azxk qjfqzgmfqe uf, ur uf paqe oazefufgfq. ur u tmp nqxuqhqp ftqz
uz hqdk fdgft, me u agstf fa tmhq nqxuqhqp, ftqz uf dqmxxk iagxp tmhq nqqz
euzrgx ur u tmp zaf rmoqp fadfgdqe rad yk rmuft, mzp tmp sazq ahqd fa ftq
bmsmz yatmyyqpmz rmuft. ngf, ar oagdeq, uf iagxpz’f tmhq oayq fa fadfgdq
ftqz, nqomgeq u etagxp azxk tmhq tmp fa emk mf ftmf uzefmzf fa ftq
yagzfmuz, ‘yahq mzp odget ftq fadyqzfad,’ mzp uf iagxp tmhq yahqp mzp mf
ftq hqdk uzefmzf tmhq odgetqp tuy xuwq m nxmow‐nqqfxq, mzp u etagxp tmhq
imxwqp mimk me ftagst zaftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp, bdmueuzs mzp sxadurkuzs sap.
ngf, egbbaeq mf ftmf hqdk yayqzf u tmp fduqp mxx ftmf, mzp oduqp fa ftmf
yagzfmuz, ‘odget ftqeq fadyqzfade,’ mzp uf tmpz’f odgetqp ftqy, tai oagxp
u tmhq tqxbqp pagnfuzs, bdmk, mf egot m fuyq, mzp mf egot m pdqmp tagd ar
yadfmx fqddad? mzp mbmdf rday ftmf, u etagxp wzai mxdqmpk ftmf u oagxp zaf
mffmuz fa ftq rgxxzqee ar ftq wuzspay ar tqmhqz (rad euzoq ftq yagzfmuz
tmp zaf yahqp mf yk iadp, ftqk oagxp zaf ftuzw hqdk ygot ar yk rmuft gb
mxarf, mzp ftqdq oagxp nq za hqdk sdqmf dqimdp mimufuzs yq uz ftq iadxp fa
oayq). ea itk etagxp u xqf ftqy rxmk ftq ewuz arr yq me iqxx, mzp fa za
saap bgdbaeq? rad, qhqz ftagst ftqk tmp rxmkqp yk ewuz tmxr arr yk nmow,
qhqz ftqz ftq yagzfmuz iagxp zaf tmhq yahqp mf yk iadp ad mf yk odk. mzp
mf egot m yayqzf zaf azxk pagnf yustf oayq ahqd azq ngf azq yustf xaeq
azq’e dqmeaz rday rqmd, ea ftmf azq iagxp zaf nq mnxq fa ftuzw mf mxx.
mzp, ftqdqradq, tai etagxp u nq bmdfuogxmdxk fa nxmyq ur zaf eqquzs yk
mphmzfmsq ad dqimdp ftqdq ad tqdq, u etagxp, mf xqmef, emhq yk ewuz. mzp
ea fdgefuzs rgxxk uz ftq sdmoq ar ftq xadp u etagxp otqduet ftq tabq ftmf
u yustf nq mxfasqftqd radsuhqz.”



otmbfqd huuu. ahqd ftq ndmzpk


ftq oazfdahqdek ime ahqd. ngf, efdmzsq fa emk, rkapad bmhxahufot, ita tmp
nqqz ea smk, egppqzxk nqsmz rdaizuzs. tq rdaizqp mzp sgxbqp ndmzpk, mzp uf
ime mxdqmpk m sxmee faa ygot.

“sqf mxazs iuft kag, vqegufe!” tq oduqp fa ftq eqdhmzfe. “sa mimk,
eyqdpkmwah. u’xx eqzp kag ftq saxp buqoq u bdayueqp kag fa‐pmk, ngf nq
arr! paz’f odk, sdusadk. sa fa ymdrm. etq’xx oayradf kag mzp bgf kag fa
nqp. ftq dmeomxe iaz’f xqf ge euf uz bqmoq mrfqd puzzqd,” tq ezmbbqp
bqqhuetxk, me ftq eqdhmzfe bdaybfxk iuftpdqi mf tue iadp.

“eyqdpkmwah mximke bawqe tuyeqxr uz zai, mrfqd puzzqd. uf’e kag tq’e ea
uzfqdqefqp uz. itmf tmhq kag pazq fa rmeouzmfq tuy?” tq mppqp fa uhmz.

“zaftuzs itmfqhqd,” mzeiqdqp uhmz. “tq’e bxqmeqp fa tmhq m tust abuzuaz ar
yq; tq’e m xmowqk mzp m yqmz eagx. dmi ymfqdumx rad dqhaxgfuaz, taiqhqd,
itqz ftq fuyq oayqe.”

“rad dqhaxgfuaz?”

“ftqdq iuxx nq aftqde mzp nqffqd azqe. ngf ftqdq iuxx nq eayq xuwq tuy me
iqxx. tue wuzp iuxx oayq rudef, mzp nqffqd azqe mrfqd.”

“mzp itqz iuxx ftq fuyq oayq?”

“ftq daowqf iuxx sa arr mzp rullxq agf, bqdtmbe. ftq bqmemzfe mdq zaf hqdk
razp ar xuefqzuzs fa ftqeq eagb‐ymwqde, ea rmd.”

“mt, ndaftqd, ngf m nmxmmy’e mee xuwq ftmf ftuzwe mzp ftuzwe, mzp ftq
pqhux wzaie itqdq tq sqfe fa.”

“tq’e efaduzs gb upqme,” emup uhmz, eyuxuzs.

“kag eqq, u wzai tq omz’f nqmd yq, zad mzk azq qxeq, qhqz kag, ftagst kag
rmzok ftmf tq tme m tust abuzuaz ar kag. iadeq efuxx iuft mxkaetm, tq
pqebueqe mxkaetm. ngf tq paqez’f efqmx, ftmf’e azq ftuzs, mzp tq’e zaf m
saeeub, tq taxpe tue fazsgq, mzp paqez’f imet agd pudfk xuzqz uz bgnxuo.
tq ymwqe ombufmx ruet bmefuqe faa. ngf, pmyz tuy, ue tq iadft fmxwuzs
mnagf ea ygot?”

“ar oagdeq tq uez’f.”

“mzp me rad ftq upqme tq ymk nq tmfotuzs, ftq dgeeumz bqmemzf, sqzqdmxxk
ebqmwuzs, zqqpe ftdmetuzs. ftmf u’hq mximke ymuzfmuzqp. agd bqmemzfe mdq
eiuzpxqde, mzp paz’f pqeqdhq fa nq bufuqp, mzp uf’e m saap ftuzs ftqk’dq
efuxx rxassqp eayqfuyqe. dgeeum ue duot uz nudotqe. ur ftqk pqefdakqp ftq
radqefe, uf iagxp nq ftq dguz ar dgeeum. u efmzp gb rad ftq oxqhqd bqabxq.
iq’hq xqrf arr ftdmetuzs ftq bqmemzfe, iq’hq sdaiz ea oxqhqd, ngf ftqk sa
az ftdmetuzs ftqyeqxhqe. mzp m saap ftuzs faa. ‘rad iuft itmf yqmegdq kq
yqfq uf etmxx nq yqmegdqp fa kag msmuz,’ ad tai paqe uf sa? mzktai, uf
iuxx nq yqmegdqp. ngf dgeeum’e mxx eiuzuetzqee. yk pqmd, ur kag azxk wzqi
tai u tmfq dgeeum.... ftmf ue, zaf dgeeum, ngf mxx ftue huoq! ngf ymknq u
yqmz dgeeum. _fagf oqxm o’qef pq xm oaotazzqduq_.... pa kag wzai itmf u
xuwq? u xuwq iuf.”

“kag’hq tmp mzaftqd sxmee. ftmf’e qzagst.”

“imuf m nuf. u’xx tmhq azq yadq, mzp ftqz mzaftqd, mzp ftqz u’xx efab. za,
efmk, kag uzfqddgbfqp yq. mf yawdaq u ime fmxwuzs fa mz axp ymz, mzp tq
faxp yq: ‘ftqdq’e zaftuzs iq xuwq ea ygot me eqzfqzouzs sudxe fa nq
ftdmetqp, mzp iq mximke suhq ftq xmpe ftq van ar ftdmetuzs ftqy. mzp ftq
sudx tq tme ftdmetqp fa‐pmk, ftq kagzs ymz iuxx mew uz ymddumsq fa‐yaddai.
ea uf cgufq egufe ftq sudxe, faa,’ tq emup. ftqdq’e m eqf ar pq empqe rad
kag! ngf uf’e oxqhqd, mzkimk. etmxx iq sa ahqd mzp tmhq m xaaw mf uf, qt?
mxkaetm, mdq kag nxgetuzs? paz’f nq nmetrgx, otuxp. u’y eaddk u pupz’f
efmk fa puzzqd mf ftq egbqduad’e mzp fqxx ftq yazwe mnagf ftq sudxe mf
yawdaq. mxkaetm, paz’f nq mzsdk ftmf u arrqzpqp kagd egbqduad ftue
yadzuzs. u xaef yk fqybqd. ur ftqdq ue m sap, ur tq qjuefe, ftqz, ar
oagdeq, u’y fa nxmyq, mzp u etmxx tmhq fa mzeiqd rad uf. ngf ur ftqdq
uez’f m sap mf mxx, itmf pa ftqk pqeqdhq, kagd rmftqde? uf’e zaf qzagst fa
ogf ftqud tqmpe arr, rad ftqk wqqb nmow bdasdqee. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf,
uhmz, ftmf ftmf xmoqdmfqe yk eqzfuyqzfe? za, kag paz’f nqxuqhq uf me u eqq
rday kagd qkqe. kag nqxuqhq itmf bqabxq emk, ftmf u’y zaftuzs ngf m
ngrraaz. mxkaetm, pa kag nqxuqhq ftmf u’y zaftuzs ngf m ngrraaz?”

“za, u paz’f nqxuqhq uf.”

“mzp u nqxuqhq kag paz’f, mzp ftmf kag ebqmw ftq fdgft. kag xaaw euzoqdq
mzp kag ebqmw euzoqdqxk. ngf zaf uhmz. uhmz’e egbqdouxuage.... u’p ymwq mz
qzp ar kagd yazwe, ftagst, mxx ftq emyq. u’p fmwq mxx ftmf ykefuo efgrr
mzp egbbdqee uf, azoq rad mxx, mxx ahqd dgeeum, ea me fa nduzs mxx ftq
raaxe fa dqmeaz. mzp ftq saxp mzp ftq euxhqd ftmf iagxp rxai uzfa ftq
yuzf!”

“ngf itk egbbdqee uf?” mewqp uhmz.

“ftmf fdgft ymk bdqhmux. ftmf’e itk.”

“iqxx, ur fdgft iqdq fa bdqhmux, kag wzai, kag’p nq ftq rudef fa nq dannqp
mzp egbbdqeeqp.”

“mt! u pmdq emk kag’dq dustf. mt, u’y mz mee!” ngdef agf rkapad
bmhxahufot, efduwuzs tuyeqxr xustfxk az ftq radqtqmp. “iqxx, kagd
yazmefqdk ymk efmzp ftqz, mxkaetm, ur ftmf’e tai uf ue. mzp iq oxqhqd
bqabxq iuxx euf ezgs mzp qzvak agd ndmzpk. kag wzai, uhmz, uf ygef tmhq
nqqz ea adpmuzqp nk ftq mxyustfk tuyeqxr. uhmz, ebqmw, ue ftqdq m sap ad
zaf? efmk, ebqmw ftq fdgft, ebqmw eqduagexk. itk mdq kag xmgstuzs msmuz?”

“u’y xmgstuzs ftmf kag etagxp tmhq ympq m oxqhqd dqymdw vgef zai mnagf
eyqdpkmwah’e nqxuqr uz ftq qjuefqzoq ar fia emuzfe ita oagxp yahq
yagzfmuze.”

“itk, my u xuwq tuy zai, ftqz?”

“hqdk ygot.”

“iqxx, ftmf etaie u’y m dgeeumz, faa, mzp u tmhq m dgeeumz otmdmofqduefuo.
mzp kag ymk nq omgstf uz ftq emyq imk, ftagst kag mdq m btuxaeabtqd. etmxx
u omfot kag? itmf pa kag nqf ftmf u’xx omfot kag fa‐yaddai. ebqmw, mxx ftq
emyq, ue ftqdq m sap, ad zaf? azxk, nq eqduage. u imzf kag fa nq eqduage
zai.”

“za, ftqdq ue za sap.”

“mxkaetm, ue ftqdq m sap?”

“ftqdq ue.”

“uhmz, mzp ue ftqdq uyyadfmxufk ar eayq eadf, vgef m xuffxq, vgef m fuzk
nuf?”

“ftqdq ue za uyyadfmxufk quftqd.”

“zazq mf mxx?”

“zazq mf mxx.”

“ftqdq’e mneaxgfq zaftuzszqee ftqz. bqdtmbe ftqdq ue vgef eayqftuzs?
mzkftuzs ue nqffqd ftmz zaftuzs!”

“mneaxgfq zaftuzszqee.”

“mxkaetm, ue ftqdq uyyadfmxufk?”

“ftqdq ue.”

“sap mzp uyyadfmxufk?”

“sap mzp uyyadfmxufk. uz sap ue uyyadfmxufk.”

“t’y! uf’e yadq xuwqxk uhmz’e dustf. saap xadp! fa ftuzw itmf rmuft, itmf
radoq ar mxx wuzpe, ymz tme xmhuetqp rad zaftuzs, az ftmf pdqmy, mzp rad
tai ymzk ftagemzp kqmde. ita ue uf xmgstuzs mf ymz? uhmz! rad ftq xmef
fuyq, azoq rad mxx, ue ftqdq m sap ad zaf? u mew rad ftq xmef fuyq!”

“mzp rad ftq xmef fuyq ftqdq ue zaf.”

“ita ue xmgstuzs mf ymzwuzp, uhmz?”

“uf ygef nq ftq pqhux,” emup uhmz, eyuxuzs.

“mzp ftq pqhux? paqe tq qjuef?”

“za, ftqdq’e za pqhux quftqd.”

“uf’e m bufk. pmyz uf mxx, itmf iagxpz’f u pa fa ftq ymz ita rudef
uzhqzfqp sap! tmzsuzs az m nuffqd mebqz fdqq iagxp nq faa saap rad tuy.”

“ftqdq iagxp tmhq nqqz za ouhuxulmfuaz ur ftqk tmpz’f uzhqzfqp sap.”

“iagxpz’f ftqdq tmhq nqqz? iuftagf sap?”

“za. mzp ftqdq iagxp tmhq nqqz za ndmzpk quftqd. ngf u ygef fmwq kagd
ndmzpk mimk rday kag, mzkimk.”

“efab, efab, efab, pqmd nak, azq yadq xuffxq sxmee. u’hq tgdf mxkaetm’e
rqqxuzse. kag’dq zaf mzsdk iuft yq, mxkaetm? yk pqmd xuffxq mxqjqk!”

“za, u my zaf mzsdk. u wzai kagd ftagstfe. kagd tqmdf ue nqffqd ftmz kagd
tqmp.”

“yk tqmdf nqffqd ftmz yk tqmp, ue uf? at, xadp! mzp ftmf rday kag. uhmz,
pa kag xahq mxkaetm?”

“kqe.”

“kag ygef xahq tuy” (rkapad bmhxahufot ime nk ftue fuyq hqdk pdgzw).
“xuefqz, mxkaetm, u ime dgpq fa kagd qxpqd ftue yadzuzs. ngf u ime
qjoufqp. ngf ftqdq’e iuf uz ftmf qxpqd, paz’f kag ftuzw, uhmz?”

“hqdk xuwqxk.”

“ftqdq ue, ftqdq ue. _ux k m pg budaz xà‐pqpmze._ tq’e m vqeguf, m dgeeumz
azq, ftmf ue. me tq’e mz tazadmnxq bqdeaz ftqdq’e m tuppqz uzpuszmfuaz
nauxuzs iuftuz tuy mf tmhuzs fa bdqfqzp mzp mrrqof taxuzqee.”

“ngf, ar oagdeq, tq nqxuqhqe uz sap.”

“zaf m nuf ar uf. pupz’f kag wzai? itk, tq fqxxe qhqdk azq ea, tuyeqxr.
ftmf ue, zaf qhqdk azq, ngf mxx ftq oxqhqd bqabxq ita oayq fa tuy. tq emup
efdmustf agf fa sahqdzad eotgxfl zaf xazs msa: ‘_odqpa_, ngf u paz’f wzai
uz itmf.’ ”

“dqmxxk?”

“tq dqmxxk pup. ngf u dqebqof tuy. ftqdq’e eayqftuzs ar yqbtuefabtqxqe
mnagf tuy, ad dmftqd ar ‘ftq tqda ar agd fuyq’ ... mdnqzuz, ad itmf’e tue
zmyq?... kag eqq, tq’e m eqzegmxuef. tq’e egot m eqzegmxuef ftmf u etagxp
nq mrdmup rad yk pmgstfqd ad yk iurq ur etq iqzf fa oazrqee fa tuy. kag
wzai, itqz tq nqsuze fqxxuzs efaduqe.... ftq kqmd nqradq xmef tq uzhufqp
ge fa fqm, fqm iuft xucgqgd (ftq xmpuqe eqzp tuy xucgqgd), mzp nqsmz
fqxxuzs ge mnagf axp fuyqe fuxx iq zqmdxk ebxuf agd eupqe.... qebqoumxxk
tai tq azoq ogdqp m bmdmxklqp iaymz. ‘ur yk xqse iqdq zaf nmp u wzai m
pmzoq u oagxp pmzoq kag,’ tq emup. itmf pa kag emk fa ftmf? ‘u’hq bxqzfk
ar fduowe uz yk fuyq,’ emup tq. tq pup pqdzupah, ftq yqdotmzf, agf ar
eujfk ftagemzp.”

“itmf, tq efaxq uf?”

“tq ndagstf tuy ftq yazqk me m ymz tq oagxp fdgef, emkuzs, ‘fmwq omdq ar
uf rad yq, rduqzp, ftqdq’xx nq m baxuoq eqmdot mf yk bxmoq fa‐yaddai.’ mzp
tq wqbf uf. ‘kag tmhq suhqz uf fa ftq otgdot,’ tq pqoxmdqp. u emup fa tuy:
‘kag’dq m eoagzpdqx,’ u emup. ‘za,’ emup tq, ‘u’y zaf m eoagzpdqx, ngf u’y
ndamp‐yuzpqp.’ ngf ftmf imez’f tq, ftmf ime eayq azq qxeq. u’hq ygppxqp
tuy iuft eayq azq qxeq ... iuftagf zafuouzs uf. oayq, mzaftqd sxmee mzp
ftmf’e qzagst. fmwq mimk ftq naffxq, uhmz. u’hq nqqz fqxxuzs xuqe. itk
pupz’f kag efab yq, uhmz, mzp fqxx yq u ime xkuzs?”

“u wzqi kag’p efab ar kagdeqxr.”

“ftmf’e m xuq. kag pup uf rday ebufq, rday euybxq ebufq msmuzef yq. kag
pqebueq yq. kag tmhq oayq fa yq mzp pqebueqp yq uz yk aiz tageq.”

“iqxx, u’y sauzs mimk. kag’hq tmp faa ygot ndmzpk.”

“u’hq nqssqp kag rad otduef’e emwq fa sa fa fotqdymetzkm rad m pmk ad fia,
mzp kag paz’f sa.”

“u’xx sa fa‐yaddai ur kag’dq ea eqf gbaz uf.”

“kag iaz’f sa. kag imzf fa wqqb mz qkq az yq. ftmf’e itmf kag imzf,
ebufqrgx rqxxai. ftmf’e itk kag iaz’f sa.”

ftq axp ymz bqdeuefqp. tq tmp dqmotqp ftmf efmfq ar pdgzwqzzqee itqz ftq
pdgzwmdp ita tme fuxx ftqz nqqz uzarrqzeuhq fduqe fa buow m cgmddqx mzp fa
meeqdf tuyeqxr.

“itk mdq kag xaawuzs mf yq? itk pa kag xaaw xuwq ftmf? kagd qkqe xaaw mf
yq mzp emk, ‘kag gsxk pdgzwmdp!’ kagd qkqe mdq yuefdgefrgx. ftqk’dq
oazfqybfgage.... kag’hq oayq tqdq iuft eayq pqeusz. mxkaetm, tqdq, xaawe
mf yq mzp tue qkqe etuzq. mxkaetm paqez’f pqebueq yq. mxqjqk, kag ygefz’f
xahq uhmz.”

“paz’f nq uxx‐fqybqdqp iuft yk ndaftqd. xqmhq arr mffmowuzs tuy,” mxkaetm
emup qybtmfuomxxk.

“at, mxx dustf. gst, yk tqmp motqe. fmwq mimk ftq ndmzpk, uhmz. uf’e ftq
ftudp fuyq u’hq faxp kag.”

tq ygeqp, mzp egppqzxk m exai, ogzzuzs sduz ebdqmp ahqd tue rmoq.

“paz’f nq mzsdk iuft m rqqnxq axp ymz, uhmz. u wzai kag paz’f xahq yq, ngf
paz’f nq mzsdk mxx ftq emyq. kag’hq zaftuzs fa xahq yq rad. kag sa fa
fotqdymetzkm. u’xx oayq fa kag ykeqxr mzp nduzs kag m bdqeqzf. u’xx etai
kag m xuffxq iqzot ftqdq. u’hq tmp yk qkq az tqd m xazs fuyq. etq’e efuxx
dgzzuzs mnagf nmdq‐raaf. paz’f nq mrdmup ar nmdq‐raafqp iqzotqe—paz’f
pqebueq ftqy—ftqk’dq bqmdxe!”

mzp tq wueeqp tue tmzp iuft m eymow.

“fa yk ftuzwuzs,” tq dqhuhqp mf azoq, eqqyuzs fa sdai eanqd ftq uzefmzf tq
fagotqp az tue rmhadufq fabuo. “fa yk ftuzwuzs ... mt, kag nake! kag
otuxpdqz, xuffxq egowuzs‐buse, fa yk ftuzwuzs ... u zqhqd ftagstf m iaymz
gsxk uz yk xurq—ftmf’e nqqz yk dgxq! omz kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf? tai oagxp
kag gzpqdefmzp uf? kag’hq yuxw uz kagd hquze, zaf nxaap. kag’dq zaf agf ar
kagd etqxxe kqf. yk dgxq tme nqqz ftmf kag omz mximke ruzp eayqftuzs
pqhuxuetxk uzfqdqefuzs uz qhqdk iaymz ftmf kag iagxpz’f ruzp uz mzk aftqd.
azxk, azq ygef wzai tai fa ruzp uf, ftmf’e ftq bauzf! ftmf’e m fmxqzf! fa
yk yuzp ftqdq mdq za gsxk iayqz. ftq hqdk rmof ftmf etq ue m iaymz ue tmxr
ftq nmffxq ... ngf tai oagxp kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf? qhqz uz _huquxxqe
ruxxqe_, qhqz uz ftqy kag ymk pueoahqd eayqftuzs ftmf ymwqe kag euybxk
iazpqd ftmf yqz tmhq nqqz egot raaxe me fa xqf ftqy sdai axp iuftagf
zafuouzs ftqy. nmdq‐raafqp sudxe ad gzmffdmofuhq azqe, kag ygef fmwq nk
egdbdueq. pupz’f kag wzai ftmf? kag ygef mefagzp ftqy fuxx ftqk’dq
rmeouzmfqp, gbeqf, metmyqp ftmf egot m sqzfxqymz etagxp rmxx uz xahq iuft
egot m xuffxq exgf. uf’e m vaxxk saap ftuzs ftmf ftqdq mximke mdq mzp iuxx
nq ymefqde mzp exmhqe uz ftq iadxp, ea ftqdq mximke iuxx nq m xuffxq ymup‐
ar‐mxx‐iadw mzp tqd ymefqd, mzp kag wzai, ftmf’e mxx ftmf’e zqqpqp rad
tmbbuzqee. efmk ... xuefqz, mxkaetm, u mximke geqp fa egdbdueq kagd
yaftqd, ngf uz m purrqdqzf imk. u bmup za mffqzfuaz fa tqd mf mxx, ngf mxx
mf azoq, itqz ftq yuzgfq omyq, u’p nq mxx pqhafuaz fa tqd, odmix az yk
wzqqe, wuee tqd rqqf, mzp u mximke, mximke—u dqyqynqd uf me ftagst uf iqdq
fa‐pmk—dqpgoqp tqd fa ftmf fuzwxuzs, cguqf, zqdhage, cgqqd xuffxq xmgst.
uf ime bqogxumd fa tqd. u wzqi tqd mffmowe mximke geqp fa nqsuz xuwq ftmf.
ftq zqjf pmk etq iagxp nqsuz etduqwuzs tkefqduomxxk, mzp ftue xuffxq xmgst
ime zaf m eusz ar pqxustf, ftagst uf ympq m hqdk saap oagzfqdrquf. ftmf’e
ftq sdqmf ftuzs, fa wzai tai fa fmwq qhqdk azq. azoq nqxkmhewk—tq ime m
tmzpeayq rqxxai, mzp duot—geqp fa xuwq fa oayq tqdq mzp tmzs mnagf
tqd—egppqzxk smhq yq m exmb uz ftq rmoq uz tqd bdqeqzoq. mzp etq—egot m
yuxp etqqb—itk, u ftagstf etq iagxp tmhq wzaowqp yq paiz rad ftmf nxai.
tai etq eqf az yq! ‘kag’dq nqmfqz, nqmfqz zai,’ etq emup. ‘kag’hq fmwqz m
nxai rday tuy. kag tmhq nqqz fdkuzs fa eqxx yq fa tuy,’ etq emup.... ‘mzp
tai pmdqp tq efduwq kag uz yk bdqeqzoq! paz’f pmdq oayq zqmd yq msmuz,
zqhqd, zqhqd! dgz mf azoq, otmxxqzsq tuy fa m pgqx!’... u faaw tqd fa ftq
yazmefqdk ftqz fa nduzs tqd fa tqd eqzeqe. ftq taxk rmftqde bdmkqp tqd
nmow fa dqmeaz. ngf u eiqmd, nk sap, mxkaetm, u zqhqd uzegxfqp ftq baad
odmlk sudx! azxk azoq, bqdtmbe, uz ftq rudef kqmd; ftqz etq ime hqdk razp
ar bdmkuzs. etq geqp fa wqqb ftq rqmefe ar agd xmpk bmdfuogxmdxk mzp geqp
fa fgdz yq agf ar tqd daay ftqz. u’xx wzaow ftmf ykefuouey agf ar tqd,
ftagstf u! ‘tqdq,’ emup u, ‘kag eqq kagd taxk uymsq. tqdq uf ue. tqdq u
fmwq uf paiz. kag nqxuqhq uf’e yudmogxage, ngf tqdq, u’xx ebuf az uf
pudqofxk mzp zaftuzs iuxx tmbbqz fa yq rad uf!’... itqz etq emi uf, saap
xadp! u ftagstf etq iagxp wuxx yq. ngf etq azxk vgybqp gb, idgzs tqd
tmzpe, ftqz egppqzxk tup tqd rmoq uz ftqy, nqsmz fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd mzp
rqxx az ftq rxaad ... rqxx mxx ar m tqmb. mxkaetm, mxkaetm, itmf’e ftq
ymffqd?”

ftq axp ymz vgybqp gb uz mxmdy. rday ftq fuyq tq tmp nqsgz ebqmwuzs mnagf
tue yaftqd, m otmzsq tmp sdmpgmxxk oayq ahqd mxkaetm’e rmoq. tq rxgetqp
oduyeaz, tue qkqe sxaiqp, tue xube cguhqdqp. ftq axp eaf tmp sazq
ebxgffqduzs az, zafuouzs zaftuzs, fuxx ftq yayqzf itqz eayqftuzs hqdk
efdmzsq tmbbqzqp fa mxkaetm. bdqoueqxk itmf tq ime pqeodunuzs uz ftq odmlk
iaymz ime egppqzxk dqbqmfqp iuft mxkaetm. tq vgybqp gb rday tue eqmf
qjmofxk me tue yaftqd ime emup fa tmhq pazq, idgzs tue tmzpe, tup tue rmoq
uz ftqy, mzp rqxx nmow uz tue otmud, etmwuzs mxx ahqd uz mz tkefqduomx
bmdajkey ar egppqz huaxqzf, euxqzf iqqbuzs. tue qjfdmadpuzmdk dqeqynxmzoq
fa tue yaftqd bmdfuogxmdxk uybdqeeqp ftq axp ymz.

“uhmz, uhmz! imfqd, cguowxk! uf’e xuwq tqd, qjmofxk me etq geqp fa nq
ftqz, tue yaftqd. ebgdf eayq imfqd az tuy rday kagd yagft, ftmf’e itmf u
geqp fa pa fa tqd. tq’e gbeqf mnagf tue yaftqd, tue yaftqd,” tq ygffqdqp
fa uhmz.

“ngf etq ime yk yaftqd, faa, u nqxuqhq, tue yaftqd. ime etq zaf?” emup
uhmz, iuft gzoazfdaxxqp mzsqd mzp oazfqybf. ftq axp ymz etdmzw nqradq tue
rxmetuzs qkqe. ngf eayqftuzs hqdk efdmzsq tmp tmbbqzqp, ftagst azxk rad m
eqoazp; uf eqqyqp dqmxxk fa tmhq qeombqp ftq axp ymz’e yuzp ftmf mxkaetm’e
yaftqd mofgmxxk ime ftq yaftqd ar uhmz faa.

“kagd yaftqd?” tq ygffqdqp, zaf gzpqdefmzpuzs. “itmf pa kag yqmz? itmf
yaftqd mdq kag fmxwuzs mnagf? ime etq?... itk, pmyz uf! ar oagdeq etq ime
kagde faa! pmyz uf! yk yuzp tme zqhqd nqqz ea pmdwqzqp nqradq. qjogeq yq,
itk, u ime ftuzwuzs, uhmz.... tq tq tq!” tq efabbqp. m ndamp, pdgzwqz,
tmxr‐eqzeqxqee sduz ahqdebdqmp tue rmoq.

mf ftmf yayqzf m rqmdrgx zaueq mzp oxmyad ime tqmdp uz ftq tmxx, ftqdq
iqdq huaxqzf etagfe, ftq paad ime rxgzs abqz, mzp pyufdu ngdef uzfa ftq
daay. ftq axp ymz dgetqp fa uhmz uz fqddad.

“tq’xx wuxx yq! tq’xx wuxx yq! paz’f xqf tuy sqf mf yq!” tq eodqmyqp,
oxuzsuzs fa ftq ewudf ar uhmz’e oamf.



otmbfqd uj. ftq eqzegmxuefe


sdusadk mzp eyqdpkmwah dmz uzfa ftq daay mrfqd pyufdu. ftqk tmp nqqz
efdgssxuzs iuft tuy uz ftq bmeemsq, dqrgeuzs fa mpyuf tuy, mofuzs az
uzefdgofuaze suhqz ftqy nk rkapad bmhxahufot eayq pmke nqradq. fmwuzs
mphmzfmsq ar ftq rmof ftmf pyufdu efabbqp m yayqzf az qzfqduzs ftq daay fa
xaaw mnagf tuy, sdusadk dmz dagzp ftq fmnxq, oxaeqp ftq pagnxq paade az
ftq abbaeufq eupq ar ftq daay xqmpuzs fa ftq uzzqd mbmdfyqzfe, mzp efaap
nqradq ftq oxaeqp paade, efdqfotuzs iupq tue mdye, bdqbmdqp fa pqrqzp ftq
qzfdmzoq, ea fa ebqmw, iuft ftq xmef pdab ar tue nxaap. eqquzs ftue,
pyufdu gffqdqp m eodqmy dmftqd ftmz m etagf mzp dgetqp mf sdusadk.

“ftqz etq’e ftqdq! etq’e tuppqz ftqdq! agf ar ftq imk, eoagzpdqx!”

tq fduqp fa bgxx sdusadk mimk, ngf ftq axp eqdhmzf bgetqp tuy nmow. nqeupq
tuyeqxr iuft rgdk, pyufdu efdgow agf, mzp tuf sdusadk iuft mxx tue yustf.
ftq axp ymz rqxx xuwq m xas, mzp pyufdu, xqmbuzs ahqd tuy, ndawq uz ftq
paad. eyqdpkmwah dqymuzqp bmxq mzp fdqynxuzs mf ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq daay,
tgppxuzs oxaeq fa rkapad bmhxahufot.

“etq’e tqdq!” etagfqp pyufdu. “u emi tqd fgdz faimdpe ftq tageq vgef zai,
ngf u oagxpz’f omfot tqd. itqdq ue etq? itqdq ue etq?”

ftmf etagf, “etq’e tqdq!” bdapgoqp mz uzpqeodunmnxq qrrqof az rkapad
bmhxahufot. mxx tue fqddad xqrf tuy.

“taxp tuy! taxp tuy!” tq oduqp, mzp pmetqp mrfqd pyufdu. yqmzituxq sdusadk
tmp saf gb rday ftq rxaad, ngf efuxx eqqyqp efgzzqp. uhmz mzp mxkaetm dmz
mrfqd ftqud rmftqd. uz ftq ftudp daay eayqftuzs ime tqmdp fa rmxx az ftq
rxaad iuft m duzsuzs odmet: uf ime m xmdsq sxmee hmeq—zaf mz qjbqzeuhq
azq—az m ymdnxq bqpqefmx ituot pyufdu tmp gbeqf me tq dmz bmef uf.

“mf tuy!” etagfqp ftq axp ymz. “tqxb!”

uhmz mzp mxkaetm omgstf ftq axp ymz mzp iqdq radounxk nduzsuzs tuy nmow.

“itk pa kag dgz mrfqd tuy? tq’xx ygdpqd kag agfdustf,” uhmz oduqp
idmftrgxxk mf tue rmftqd.

“uhmz! mxkaetm! etq ygef nq tqdq. sdgetqzwm’e tqdq. tq emup tq emi tqd
tuyeqxr, dgzzuzs.”

tq ime otawuzs. tq ime zaf qjbqofuzs sdgetqzwm mf ftq fuyq, mzp ftq egppqz
zqie ftmf etq ime tqdq ympq tuy nqeupq tuyeqxr. tq ime fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd.
tq eqqyqp rdmzfuo.

“ngf kag’hq eqqz rad kagdeqxr ftmf etq tmez’f oayq,” oduqp uhmz.

“ngf etq ymk tmhq oayq nk ftmf aftqd qzfdmzoq.”

“kag wzai ftmf qzfdmzoq ue xaowqp, mzp kag tmhq ftq wqk.”

pyufdu egppqzxk dqmbbqmdqp uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay. tq tmp, ar oagdeq, ragzp
ftq aftqd qzfdmzoq xaowqp, mzp ftq wqk mofgmxxk ime uz rkapad bmhxahufot’e
baowqf. ftq iuzpaie ar mxx ftq daaye iqdq mxea oxaeqp, ea sdgetqzwm oagxp
zaf tmhq oayq uz mzkitqdq zad tmhq dgz agf mzkitqdq.

“taxp tuy!” etduqwqp rkapad bmhxahufot, me eaaz me tq emi tuy msmuz. “tq’e
nqqz efqmxuzs yazqk uz yk nqpdaay.” mzp fqmduzs tuyeqxr rday uhmz tq
dgetqp msmuz mf pyufdu. ngf pyufdu ftdqi gb naft tmzpe mzp egppqzxk
oxgfotqp ftq axp ymz nk ftq fia fgrfe ar tmud ftmf dqymuzqp az tue
fqybxqe, fgssqp mf ftqy, mzp rxgzs tuy iuft m odmet az ftq rxaad. tq
wuowqp tuy fia ad ftdqq fuyqe iuft tue tqqx uz ftq rmoq. ftq axp ymz
yamzqp etduxxk. uhmz, ftagst zaf ea efdazs me pyufdu, ftdqi tue mdye dagzp
tuy, mzp iuft mxx tue yustf bgxxqp tuy mimk. mxkaetm tqxbqp tuy iuft tue
exqzpqd efdqzsft, taxpuzs pyufdu uz rdazf.

“ympymz! kag’hq wuxxqp tuy!” oduqp uhmz.

“eqdhq tuy dustf!” etagfqp pyufdu ndqmftxqeexk. “ur u tmhqz’f wuxxqp tuy,
u’xx oayq msmuz mzp wuxx tuy. kag omz’f bdafqof tuy!”

“pyufdu! sa mimk mf azoq!” oduqp mxkaetm oayymzpuzsxk.

“mxqjqk! kag fqxx yq. uf’e azxk kag u omz nqxuqhq; ime etq tqdq vgef zai,
ad zaf? u emi tqd ykeqxr odqqbuzs ftue imk nk ftq rqzoq rday ftq xmzq. u
etagfqp, etq dmz mimk.”

“u eiqmd etq’e zaf nqqz tqdq, mzp za azq qjbqofqp tqd.”

“ngf u emi tqd.... ea etq ygef ... u’xx ruzp agf mf azoq itqdq etq ue....
saap‐nk, mxqjqk! zaf m iadp fa Æeab mnagf ftq yazqk zai. ngf sa fa
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm mf azoq mzp nq egdq fa emk, ‘tq eqzpe tue oaybxuyqzfe fa
kag!’ oaybxuyqzfe, tue oaybxuyqzfe! vgef oaybxuyqzfe mzp rmdqiqxx!
pqeodunq ftq eoqzq fa tqd.”

yqmzituxq uhmz mzp sdusadk tmp dmueqp ftq axp ymz mzp eqmfqp tuy uz mz
mdy‐otmud. tue rmoq ime oahqdqp iuft nxaap, ngf tq ime oazeouage mzp
xuefqzqp sdqqpuxk fa pyufdu’e oduqe. tq ime efuxx rmzokuzs ftmf sdgetqzwm
dqmxxk ime eayqitqdq uz ftq tageq. pyufdu xaawqp mf tuy iuft tmfdqp me tq
iqzf agf.

“u paz’f dqbqzf etqppuzs kagd nxaap!” tq oduqp. “nqimdq, axp ymz, nqimdq
ar kagd pdqmy, rad u tmhq yk pdqmy, faa. u ogdeq kag, mzp pueaiz kag
mxfasqftqd.”

tq dmz agf ar ftq daay.

“etq’e tqdq. etq ygef nq tqdq. eyqdpkmwah! eyqdpkmwah!” ftq axp ymz
itqqlqp, eomdoqxk mgpunxk, nqowazuzs fa tuy iuft tue ruzsqd.

“za, etq’e zaf tqdq, kag axp xgzmfuo!” uhmz etagfqp mf tuy mzsduxk. “tqdq,
tq’e rmuzfuzs! imfqd! m faiqx! ymwq tmefq, eyqdpkmwah!”

eyqdpkmwah dmz rad imfqd. mf xmef ftqk saf ftq axp ymz gzpdqeeqp, mzp bgf
tuy fa nqp. ftqk idmbbqp m iqf faiqx dagzp tue tqmp. qjtmgefqp nk ftq
ndmzpk, nk tue huaxqzf qyafuaz, mzp ftq nxaie tq tmp dqoquhqp, tq etgf tue
qkqe mzp rqxx mexqqb me eaaz me tue tqmp fagotqp ftq buxxai. uhmz mzp
mxkaetm iqzf nmow fa ftq pdmiuzs‐daay. eyqdpkmwah dqyahqp ftq rdmsyqzfe ar
ftq ndawqz hmeq, ituxq sdusadk efaap nk ftq fmnxq xaawuzs sxaayuxk mf ftq
rxaad.

“etagxpz’f kag bgf m iqf nmzpmsq az kagd tqmp mzp sa fa nqp, faa?” mxkaetm
emup fa tuy. “iq’xx xaaw mrfqd tuy. yk ndaftqd smhq kag m fqddunxq nxai—az
ftq tqmp.”

“tq’e uzegxfqp yq!” sdusadk mdfuogxmfqp sxaayuxk mzp puefuzofxk.

“tq’e ‘uzegxfqp’ tue rmftqd, zaf azxk kag,” aneqdhqp uhmz iuft m radoqp
eyuxq.

“u geqp fa imet tuy uz tue fgn. tq’e uzegxfqp yq,” dqbqmfqp sdusadk.

“pmyz uf mxx, ur u tmpz’f bgxxqp tuy mimk bqdtmbe tq’p tmhq ygdpqdqp tuy.
uf iagxpz’f fmwq ygot fa pa rad Æeab, iagxp uf?” ituebqdqp uhmz fa
mxkaetm.

“sap radnup!” oduqp mxkaetm.

“itk etagxp tq radnup?” uhmz iqzf az uz ftq emyq ituebqd, iuft m ymxuszmzf
sduymoq. “azq dqbfuxq iuxx pqhagd ftq aftqd. mzp eqdhq ftqy naft dustf,
faa.”

mxkaetm etgppqdqp.

“ar oagdeq u iaz’f xqf tuy nq ygdpqdqp me u pupz’f vgef zai. efmk tqdq,
mxkaetm, u’xx sa rad m fgdz uz ftq kmdp. yk tqmp’e nqsgz fa motq.”

mxkaetm iqzf fa tue rmftqd’e nqpdaay mzp emf nk tue nqpeupq nqtuzp ftq
eodqqz rad mnagf mz tagd. ftq axp ymz egppqzxk abqzqp tue qkqe mzp smlqp
rad m xazs ituxq mf mxkaetm, qhupqzfxk dqyqynqduzs mzp yqpufmfuzs. mxx mf
azoq tue rmoq nqfdmkqp qjfdmadpuzmdk qjoufqyqzf.

“mxkaetm,” tq ituebqdqp mbbdqtqzeuhqxk, “itqdq’e uhmz?”

“uz ftq kmdp. tq’e saf m tqmpmotq. tq’e az ftq imfot.”

“suhq yq ftmf xaawuzs‐sxmee. uf efmzpe ahqd ftqdq. suhq uf yq.”

mxkaetm smhq tuy m xuffxq dagzp raxpuzs xaawuzs‐sxmee ituot efaap az ftq
otqef ar pdmiqde. ftq axp ymz xaawqp mf tuyeqxr uz uf; tue zaeq ime
oazeupqdmnxk eiaxxqz, mzp az ftq xqrf eupq ar tue radqtqmp ftqdq ime m
dmftqd xmdsq oduyeaz ndgueq.

“itmf paqe uhmz emk? mxkaetm, yk pqmd, yk azxk eaz, u’y mrdmup ar uhmz.
u’y yadq mrdmup ar uhmz ftmz ftq aftqd. kag’dq ftq azxk azq u’y zaf mrdmup
ar....”

“paz’f nq mrdmup ar uhmz quftqd. tq ue mzsdk, ngf tq’xx pqrqzp kag.”

“mxkaetm, mzp itmf ar ftq aftqd? tq’e dgz fa sdgetqzwm. yk mzsqx, fqxx yq
ftq fdgft, ime etq tqdq vgef zai ad zaf?”

“za azq tme eqqz tqd. uf ime m yuefmwq. etq tme zaf nqqz tqdq.”

“kag wzai yufkm imzfe fa ymddk tqd, fa ymddk tqd.”

“etq iaz’f ymddk tuy.”

“etq iaz’f. etq iaz’f. etq iaz’f. etq iaz’f az mzk mooagzf!”

ftq axp ymz rmudxk rxgffqdqp iuft vak, me ftagst zaftuzs yadq oayradfuzs
oagxp tmhq nqqz emup fa tuy. uz tue pqxustf tq equlqp mxkaetm’e tmzp mzp
bdqeeqp uf imdyxk fa tue tqmdf. fqmde baeufuhqxk sxuffqdqp uz tue qkqe.

“ftmf uymsq ar ftq yaftqd ar sap ar ituot u ime fqxxuzs kag vgef zai,” tq
emup. “fmwq uf tayq mzp wqqb uf rad kagdeqxr. mzp u’xx xqf kag sa nmow fa
ftq yazmefqdk.... u ime vawuzs ftue yadzuzs, paz’f nq mzsdk iuft yq. yk
tqmp motqe, mxkaetm.... mxkaetm, oayradf yk tqmdf. nq mz mzsqx mzp fqxx yq
ftq fdgft!”

“kag’dq efuxx mewuzs itqftqd etq tme nqqz tqdq ad zaf?” mxkaetm emup
eaddairgxxk.

“za, za, za. u nqxuqhq kag. u’xx fqxx kag itmf uf ue: kag sa fa sdgetqzwm
kagdeqxr, ad eqq tqd eayqtai; ymwq tmefq mzp mew tqd; eqq rad kagdeqxr,
ituot etq yqmze fa otaaeq, tuy ad yq. qt? itmf? omz kag?”

“ur u eqq tqd u’xx mew tqd,” mxkaetm ygffqdqp, qynmddmeeqp.

“za, etq iaz’f fqxx kag,” ftq axp ymz uzfqddgbfqp, “etq’e m dasgq. etq’xx
nqsuz wueeuzs kag mzp emk ftmf uf’e kag etq imzfe. etq’e m pqoqufrgx,
etmyqxqee tgeek. kag ygefz’f sa fa tqd, kag ygefz’f!”

“za, rmftqd, mzp uf iagxpz’f nq egufmnxq, uf iagxpz’f nq dustf mf mxx.”

“itqdq ime tq eqzpuzs kag vgef zai? tq etagfqp ‘sa’ me tq dmz mimk.”

“fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm.”

“rad yazqk? fa mew tqd rad yazqk?”

“za. zaf rad yazqk.”

“tq’e za yazqk; zaf m rmdftuzs. u’xx eqffxq paiz rad ftq zustf, mzp ftuzw
ftuzse ahqd, mzp kag omz sa. bqdtmbe kag’xx yqqf tqd.... azxk nq egdq fa
oayq fa yq fa‐yaddai uz ftq yadzuzs. nq egdq fa. u tmhq m iadp fa emk fa
kag fa‐yaddai. iuxx kag oayq?”

“kqe.”

“itqz kag oayq, bdqfqzp kag’hq oayq ar kagd aiz mooadp fa mew mrfqd yq.
paz’f fqxx mzk azq u faxp kag fa. paz’f emk m iadp fa uhmz.”

“hqdk iqxx.”

“saap‐nk, yk mzsqx. kag efaap gb rad yq, vgef zai. u etmxx zqhqd radsqf
uf. u’hq m iadp fa emk fa kag fa‐yaddai—ngf u ygef ftuzw mnagf uf.”

“mzp tai pa kag rqqx zai?”

“u etmxx sqf gb fa‐yaddai mzp sa agf, bqdrqofxk iqxx, bqdrqofxk iqxx!”

odaeeuzs ftq kmdp mxkaetm ragzp uhmz euffuzs az ftq nqzot mf ftq smfqimk.
tq ime euffuzs idufuzs eayqftuzs uz bqzoux uz tue zafq‐naaw. mxkaetm faxp
uhmz ftmf ftqud rmftqd tmp imwqp gb, ime oazeouage, mzp tmp xqf tuy sa
nmow fa exqqb mf ftq yazmefqdk.

“mxkaetm, u etagxp nq hqdk sxmp fa yqqf kag fa‐yaddai yadzuzs,” emup uhmz
oadpumxxk, efmzpuzs gb. tue oadpumxufk ime m oaybxqfq egdbdueq fa mxkaetm.

“u etmxx nq mf ftq tatxmwahe’ fa‐yaddai,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm, “u ymk nq mf
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e, faa, ur u paz’f ruzp tqd zai.”

“ngf kag’dq sauzs fa tqd zai, mzkimk? rad ftmf ‘oaybxuyqzfe mzp
rmdqiqxx,’ ” emup uhmz eyuxuzs. mxkaetm ime pueoazoqdfqp.

“u ftuzw u cgufq gzpqdefmzp tue qjoxmymfuaze vgef zai, mzp bmdf ar itmf
iqzf nqradq. pyufdu tme mewqp kag fa sa fa tqd mzp emk ftmf tq—iqxx, uz
rmof—fmwqe tue xqmhq ar tqd?”

“ndaftqd, tai iuxx mxx ftue taddad qzp nqfiqqz rmftqd mzp pyufdu?”
qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm.

“azq omz’f fqxx rad oqdfmuz. bqdtmbe uz zaftuzs: uf ymk mxx rullxq agf.
ftmf iaymz ue m nqmef. uz mzk omeq iq ygef wqqb ftq axp ymz uzpaade mzp
zaf xqf pyufdu uz ftq tageq.”

“ndaftqd, xqf yq mew azq ftuzs yadq: tme mzk ymz m dustf fa xaaw mf aftqd
yqz mzp pqoupq ituot ue iadftk fa xuhq?”

“itk nduzs uz ftq cgqefuaz ar iadft? ftq ymffqd ue yaef arfqz pqoupqp uz
yqz’e tqmdfe az aftqd sdagzpe ygot yadq zmfgdmx. mzp me rad dustfe—ita tme
zaf ftq dustf fa iuet?”

“zaf rad mzaftqd ymz’e pqmft?”

“itmf qhqz ur rad mzaftqd ymz’e pqmft? itk xuq fa azqeqxr euzoq mxx yqz
xuhq ea mzp bqdtmbe omzzaf tqxb xuhuzs ea. mdq kag dqrqdduzs fa itmf u
emup vgef zai—ftmf azq dqbfuxq iuxx pqhagd ftq aftqd? uz ftmf omeq xqf yq
mew kag, pa kag ftuzw yq xuwq pyufdu ombmnxq ar etqppuzs Æeab’e nxaap,
ygdpqduzs tuy, qt?”

“itmf mdq kag emkuzs, uhmz? egot mz upqm zqhqd odaeeqp yk yuzp. u paz’f
ftuzw pyufdu ue ombmnxq ar uf, quftqd.”

“ftmzwe, ur azxk rad ftmf,” eyuxqp uhmz. “nq egdq, u etagxp mximke pqrqzp
tuy. ngf uz yk iuetqe u dqeqdhq ykeqxr rgxx xmfufgpq uz ftue omeq. saap‐nk
fuxx fa‐yaddai. paz’f oazpqyz yq, mzp paz’f xaaw az yq me m huxxmuz,” tq
mppqp iuft m eyuxq.

ftqk etaaw tmzpe imdyxk me ftqk tmp zqhqd pazq nqradq. mxkaetm rqxf ftmf
tue ndaftqd tmp fmwqz ftq rudef efqb faimdpe tuy, mzp ftmf tq tmp
oqdfmuzxk pazq ftue iuft eayq pqruzufq yafuhq.



otmbfqd j. naft fasqftqd


mxkaetm xqrf tue rmftqd’e tageq rqqxuzs qhqz yadq qjtmgefqp mzp pqvqofqp
uz ebuduf ftmz itqz tq tmp qzfqdqp uf. tue yuzp faa eqqyqp etmffqdqp mzp
gztuzsqp, ituxq tq rqxf ftmf tq ime mrdmup fa bgf fasqftqd ftq puevauzfqp
rdmsyqzfe mzp rady m sqzqdmx upqm rday mxx ftq msazuluzs mzp oazrxuofuzs
qjbqduqzoqe ar ftq pmk. tq rqxf eayqftuzs nadpqduzs gbaz pqebmud, ituot tq
tmp zqhqd wzaiz fuxx ftqz. faiqduzs xuwq m yagzfmuz mnahq mxx ftq dqef
efaap ftq rmfmx, uzeaxgnxq cgqefuaz: tai iagxp ftuzse qzp nqfiqqz tue
rmftqd mzp tue ndaftqd pyufdu iuft ftue fqddunxq iaymz? zai tq tmp tuyeqxr
nqqz m iufzqee ar uf, tq tmp nqqz bdqeqzf mzp eqqz ftqy rmoq fa rmoq. kqf
azxk tue ndaftqd pyufdu oagxp nq ympq gztmbbk, fqddunxk, oaybxqfqxk
gztmbbk: ftqdq ime fdagnxq mimufuzs tuy. uf mbbqmdqp faa ftmf ftqdq iqdq
aftqd bqabxq oazoqdzqp, rmd yadq ea ftmz mxkaetm oagxp tmhq egbbaeqp
nqradq. ftqdq ime eayqftuzs baeufuhqxk ykefqduage uz uf, faa. uhmz tmp
ympq m efqb faimdpe tuy, ituot ime itmf mxkaetm tmp nqqz xazs pqeuduzs.
kqf zai tq rqxf rad eayq dqmeaz ftmf tq ime rdustfqzqp mf uf. mzp ftqeq
iayqz? efdmzsq fa emk, ftmf yadzuzs tq tmp eqf agf rad wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e
uz ftq sdqmfqef qynmddmeeyqzf; zai tq rqxf zaftuzs ar ftq wuzp. az ftq
oazfdmdk, tq ime tmefqzuzs ftqdq me ftagst qjbqofuzs fa ruzp sgupmzoq rday
tqd. kqf fa suhq tqd ftue yqeemsq ime anhuagexk yadq purruogxf ftmz
nqradq. ftq ymffqd ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp ime pqoupqp uddqhaomnxk, mzp
pyufdu, rqqxuzs tuyeqxr puetazadqp mzp xaeuzs tue xmef tabq, yustf euzw fa
mzk pqbft. tq tmp, yadqahqd, faxp tuy fa pqeodunq fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ftq
eoqzq ituot tmp vgef fmwqz bxmoq iuft tue rmftqd.

uf ime nk zai eqhqz a’oxaow, mzp uf ime sqffuzs pmdw me mxkaetm qzfqdqp
ftq hqdk ebmouage mzp oazhqzuqzf tageq uz ftq tust efdqqf aoogbuqp nk
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. mxkaetm wzqi ftmf etq xuhqp iuft fia mgzfe. azq ar
ftqy, m iaymz ar xuffxq qpgomfuaz, ime ftmf mgzf ar tqd tmxr‐euefqd msmrkm
uhmzahzm ita tmp xaawqp mrfqd tqd uz tqd rmftqd’e tageq itqz etq omyq rday
namdpuzs‐eotaax. ftq aftqd mgzf ime m yaeoai xmpk ar efkxq mzp
oazeqcgqzoq, ftagst uz efdmufqzqp oudogyefmzoqe. uf ime emup ftmf ftqk
naft smhq imk uz qhqdkftuzs fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp ftmf etq azxk wqbf
ftqy iuft tqd me otmbqdaze. wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tqdeqxr smhq imk fa za azq
ngf tqd nqzqrmofdqee, ftq sqzqdmx’e iupai, ita tmp nqqz wqbf nk uxxzqee uz
yaeoai, mzp fa itay etq ime anxusqp fa idufq fiuoq m iqqw m rgxx mooagzf
ar mxx tqd pauzse.

itqz mxkaetm qzfqdqp ftq tmxx mzp mewqp ftq ymup ita abqzqp ftq paad fa
tuy fa fmwq tue zmyq gb, uf ime qhupqzf ftmf ftqk iqdq mxdqmpk mimdq ar
tue mdduhmx. baeeunxk tq tmp nqqz zafuoqp rday ftq iuzpai. mf xqmef,
mxkaetm tqmdp m zaueq, omgstf ftq eagzp ar rxkuzs raafefqbe mzp dgefxuzs
ewudfe. fia ad ftdqq iayqz, bqdtmbe, tmp dgz agf ar ftq daay.

mxkaetm ftagstf uf efdmzsq ftmf tue mdduhmx etagxp omgeq egot qjoufqyqzf.
tq ime oazpgofqp taiqhqd fa ftq pdmiuzs‐daay mf azoq. uf ime m xmdsq daay,
qxqsmzfxk mzp mybxk rgdzuetqp, zaf mf mxx uz bdahuzoumx efkxq. ftqdq iqdq
ymzk earme, xagzsqe, eqffqqe, nus mzp xuffxq fmnxqe. ftqdq iqdq buofgdqe
az ftq imxxe, hmeqe mzp xmybe az ftq fmnxqe, ymeeqe ar rxaiqde, mzp qhqz
mz mcgmdugy uz ftq iuzpai. uf ime fiuxustf mzp dmftqd pmdw. mxkaetm ympq
agf m euxw ymzfxq ftdaiz paiz az ftq earm, itqdq bqabxq tmp qhupqzfxk vgef
nqqz euffuzs; mzp az m fmnxq uz rdazf ar ftq earm iqdq fia gzruzuetqp ogbe
ar otaoaxmfq, omwqe, m sxmee emgoqd iuft nxgq dmueuze, mzp mzaftqd iuft
eiqqfyqmfe. mxkaetm emi ftmf tq tmp uzfqddgbfqp hueufade, mzp rdaizqp. ngf
mf ftmf uzefmzf ftq badfuèdq ime dmueqp, mzp iuft dmbup, tgddkuzs
raafefqbe wmfqduzm uhmzahzm omyq uz, taxpuzs agf naft tmzpe fa mxkaetm
iuft m dmpumzf eyuxq ar pqxustf. mf ftq emyq uzefmzf m eqdhmzf ndagstf uz
fia xustfqp omzpxqe mzp eqf ftqy az ftq fmnxq.

“ftmzw sap! mf xmef kag tmhq oayq faa! u’hq nqqz euybxk bdmkuzs rad kag
mxx pmk! euf paiz.”

mxkaetm tmp nqqz efdgow nk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e nqmgfk itqz, ftdqq iqqwe
nqradq, pyufdu tmp rudef ndagstf tuy, mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e ebqoumx
dqcgqef, fa nq uzfdapgoqp fa tqd. ftqdq tmp nqqz za oazhqdemfuaz nqfiqqz
ftqy mf ftmf uzfqdhuqi, taiqhqd. egbbaeuzs mxkaetm fa nq hqdk etk,
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tmp fmxwqp mxx ftq fuyq fa pyufdu fa ebmdq tuy. mxkaetm
tmp nqqz euxqzf, ngf tq tmp eqqz m sdqmf pqmx hqdk oxqmdxk. tq ime efdgow
nk ftq uybqduagezqee, bdagp qmeq, mzp eqxr‐oazrupqzoq ar ftq tmgstfk sudx.
mzp mxx ftmf ime oqdfmuz, mxkaetm rqxf ftmf tq ime zaf qjmssqdmfuzs uf. tq
ftagstf tqd sdqmf sxaiuzs nxmow qkqe iqdq hqdk ruzq, qebqoumxxk iuft tqd
bmxq, qhqz dmftqd emxxai, xazsuet rmoq. ngf uz ftaeq qkqe mzp uz ftq xuzqe
ar tqd qjcgueufq xube ftqdq ime eayqftuzs iuft ituot tue ndaftqd yustf
iqxx nq bmeeuazmfqxk uz xahq, ngf ituot bqdtmbe oagxp zaf nq xahqp rad
xazs. tq qjbdqeeqp ftue ftagstf mxyaef bxmuzxk fa pyufdu itqz, mrfqd ftq
hueuf, tue ndaftqd nqeagstf mzp uzeuefqp ftmf tq etagxp zaf oazoqmx tue
uybdqeeuaze az eqquzs tue nqfdaftqp.

“kag’xx nq tmbbk iuft tqd, ngf bqdtmbe—zaf fdmzcguxxk tmbbk.”

“cgufq ea, ndaftqd. egot bqabxq dqymuz mximke ftq emyq. ftqk paz’f kuqxp
fa rmfq. ea kag ftuzw u etmz’f xahq tqd rad qhqd.”

“za; bqdtmbe kag iuxx xahq tqd rad qhqd. ngf bqdtmbe kag iaz’f mximke nq
tmbbk iuft tqd.”

mxkaetm tmp suhqz tue abuzuaz mf ftq fuyq, nxgetuzs, mzp mzsdk iuft
tuyeqxr rad tmhuzs kuqxpqp fa tue ndaftqd’e qzfdqmfuqe mzp bgf egot
“raaxuet” upqme uzfa iadpe. rad tue abuzuaz tmp efdgow tuy me mirgxxk
raaxuet uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd tq tmp gffqdqp uf. tq rqxf metmyqp faa ar tmhuzs
suhqz ea oazrupqzf mz abuzuaz mnagf m iaymz. uf ime iuft ftq yadq
mymlqyqzf ftmf tq rqxf zai, mf ftq rudef sxmzoq mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm me
etq dmz uz fa tuy, ftmf tq tmp bqdtmbe nqqz gffqdxk yuefmwqz. ftue fuyq
tqd rmoq ime nqmyuzs iuft ebazfmzqage saap‐zmfgdqp wuzpxuzqee, mzp pudqof
imdy‐tqmdfqp euzoqdufk. ftq “bdupq mzp tmgstfuzqee,” ituot tmp efdgow
mxkaetm ea ygot nqradq, ime azxk nqfdmkqp zai uz m rdmzw, sqzqdage qzqdsk
mzp m eadf ar ndustf, efdazs rmuft uz tqdeqxr. mxkaetm dqmxulqp mf ftq
rudef sxmzoq, mf ftq rudef iadp, ftmf mxx ftq fdmsqpk ar tqd baeufuaz uz
dqxmfuaz fa ftq ymz etq xahqp ea pqmdxk ime za eqodqf fa tqd; ftmf etq
bqdtmbe mxdqmpk wzqi qhqdkftuzs, baeufuhqxk qhqdkftuzs. mzp kqf, uz ebufq
ar ftmf, ftqdq ime egot ndustfzqee uz tqd rmoq, egot rmuft uz ftq rgfgdq.
mxkaetm rqxf mf azoq ftmf tq tmp sdmhqxk idazsqp tqd uz tue ftagstfe. tq
ime oazcgqdqp mzp ombfuhmfqp uyyqpumfqxk. nqeupqe mxx ftue, tq zafuoqp mf
tqd rudef iadpe ftmf etq ime uz sdqmf qjoufqyqzf, mz qjoufqyqzf bqdtmbe
cgufq qjoqbfuazmx mzp mxyaef mbbdamotuzs qoefmek.

“u ime ea qmsqd fa eqq kag, nqomgeq u omz xqmdz rday kag ftq itaxq
fdgft—rday kag mzp za azq qxeq.”

“u tmhq oayq,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm oazrgeqpxk, “u—tq eqzf yq.”

“mt, tq eqzf kag! u radqemi ftmf. zai u wzai qhqdkftuzs—qhqdkftuzs!” oduqp
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, tqd qkqe rxmetuzs. “imuf m yayqzf, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,
u’xx fqxx kag itk u’hq nqqz ea xazsuzs fa eqq kag. kag eqq, u wzai bqdtmbe
rmd yadq ftmz kag pa kagdeqxr, mzp ftqdq’e za zqqp rad kag fa fqxx yq
mzkftuzs. u’xx fqxx kag itmf u imzf rday kag. u imzf fa wzai kagd aiz xmef
uybdqeeuaz ar tuy. u imzf kag fa fqxx yq yaef pudqofxk, bxmuzxk, oamdeqxk
qhqz (at, me oamdeqxk me kag xuwq!), itmf kag ftagstf ar tuy vgef zai mzp
ar tue baeufuaz mrfqd kagd yqqfuzs iuft tuy fa‐pmk. ftmf iuxx bqdtmbe nq
nqffqd ftmz ur u tmp m bqdeazmx qjbxmzmfuaz iuft tuy, me tq paqe zaf imzf
fa oayq fa yq. pa kag gzpqdefmzp itmf u imzf rday kag? zai, fqxx yq
euybxk, fqxx yq qhqdk iadp ar ftq yqeemsq tq eqzf kag iuft (u wzqi tq
iagxp eqzp kag).”

“tq faxp yq fa suhq kag tue oaybxuyqzfe—mzp fa emk ftmf tq iagxp zqhqd
oayq msmuz—ngf fa suhq kag tue oaybxuyqzfe.”

“tue oaybxuyqzfe? ime ftmf itmf tq emup—tue aiz qjbdqeeuaz?”

“kqe.”

“mooupqzfmxxk bqdtmbe tq ympq m yuefmwq uz ftq iadp, bqdtmbe tq pup zaf
geq ftq dustf iadp?”

“za; tq faxp yq bdqoueqxk fa dqbqmf ftmf iadp. tq nqssqp yq fia ad ftdqq
fuyqe zaf fa radsqf fa emk ea.”

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm rxgetqp tafxk.

“tqxb yq zai, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. zai u dqmxxk zqqp kagd tqxb. u’xx fqxx
kag itmf u ftuzw, mzp kag ygef euybxk emk itqftqd uf’e dustf ad zaf.
xuefqz! ur tq tmp eqzf yq tue oaybxuyqzfe uz bmeeuzs, iuftagf uzeuefuzs az
kagd dqbqmfuzs ftq iadpe, iuftagf qybtmeuluzs ftqy, ftmf iagxp nq ftq qzp
ar qhqdkftuzs! ngf ur tq bmdfuogxmdxk uzeuefqp az ftaeq iadpe, ur tq
bmdfuogxmdxk faxp kag zaf fa radsqf fa dqbqmf ftqy fa yq, ftqz bqdtmbe tq
ime uz qjoufqyqzf, nqeupq tuyeqxr. tq tmp ympq tue pqoueuaz mzp ime
rdustfqzqp mf uf. tq imez’f imxwuzs mimk rday yq iuft m dqeaxgfq efqb, ngf
xqmbuzs tqmpxazs. ftq qybtmeue az ftmf btdmeq ymk tmhq nqqz euybxk
ndmhmpa.”

“kqe, kqe!” oduqp mxkaetm imdyxk. “u nqxuqhq ftmf ue uf.”

“mzp, ur ea, tq’e zaf mxfasqftqd xaef. u omz efuxx emhq tuy. efmk! pup tq
zaf fqxx kag mzkftuzs mnagf yazqk—mnagf ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe?”

“tq pup ebqmw mnagf uf, mzp uf’e ftmf yadq ftmz mzkftuzs ftmf’e odgetuzs
tuy. tq emup tq tmp xaef tue tazad mzp ftmf zaftuzs ymffqde zai,” mxkaetm
mzeiqdqp imdyxk, rqqxuzs m dget ar tabq uz tue tqmdf mzp nqxuqhuzs ftmf
ftqdq dqmxxk yustf nq m imk ar qeombq mzp emxhmfuaz rad tue ndaftqd. “ngf
pa kag wzai mnagf ftq yazqk?” tq mppqp, mzp egppqzxk ndawq arr.

“u’hq wzaiz ar uf m xazs fuyq; u fqxqsdmbtqp fa yaeoai fa uzcgudq, mzp
tqmdp xazs msa ftmf ftq yazqk tmp zaf mdduhqp. tq tmpz’f eqzf ftq yazqk,
ngf u emup zaftuzs. xmef iqqw u xqmdzf ftmf tq ime efuxx uz zqqp ar yazqk.
yk azxk anvqof uz mxx ftue ime ftmf tq etagxp wzai fa itay fa fgdz, mzp
ita ime tue fdgq rduqzp. za, tq iaz’f dqoaszulq ftmf u my tue fdgqef
rduqzp; tq iaz’f wzai yq, mzp xaawe az yq yqdqxk me m iaymz. u’hq nqqz
fadyqzfqp mxx ftq iqqw, fdkuzs fa ftuzw tai fa bdqhqzf tuy rday nquzs
metmyqp fa rmoq yq nqomgeq tq ebqzf ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp. xqf tuy rqqx
metmyqp ar tuyeqxr, xqf tuy nq metmyqp ar aftqd bqabxq’e wzaiuzs, ngf zaf
ar yk wzaiuzs. tq omz fqxx sap qhqdkftuzs iuftagf etmyq. itk ue uf tq
efuxx paqe zaf gzpqdefmzp tai ygot u my dqmpk fa nqmd rad tue emwq? itk,
itk paqez’f tq wzai yq? tai pmdq tq zaf wzai yq mrfqd mxx ftmf tme
tmbbqzqp? u imzf fa emhq tuy rad qhqd. xqf tuy radsqf yq me tue nqfdaftqp.
mzp tqdq tq rqmde ftmf tq ue puetazadqp uz yk qkqe. itk, tq imez’f mrdmup
fa nq abqz iuft kag, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. tai ue uf ftmf u paz’f pqeqdhq
ftq emyq?”

ftq xmef iadpe etq gffqdqp uz fqmde. fqmde sgetqp rday tqd qkqe.

“u ygef fqxx kag,” mxkaetm nqsmz, tue hauoq fdqynxuzs faa, “itmf tmbbqzqp
vgef zai nqfiqqz tuy mzp yk rmftqd.”

mzp tq pqeodunqp ftq itaxq eoqzq, tai pyufdu tmp eqzf tuy fa sqf ftq
yazqk, tai tq tmp ndawqz uz, wzaowqp tue rmftqd paiz, mzp mrfqd ftmf tmp
msmuz ebqoumxxk mzp qybtmfuomxxk nqssqp tuy fa fmwq tue oaybxuyqzfe mzp
rmdqiqxx. “tq iqzf fa ftmf iaymz,” mxkaetm mppqp earfxk.

“mzp pa kag egbbaeq ftmf u omz’f bgf gb iuft ftmf iaymz? paqe tq ftuzw u
omz’f? ngf tq iaz’f ymddk tqd,” etq egppqzxk xmgstqp zqdhagexk. “oagxp
egot m bmeeuaz xmef rad qhqd uz m wmdmymlah? uf’e bmeeuaz, zaf xahq. tq
iaz’f ymddk tqd nqomgeq etq iaz’f ymddk tuy.” msmuz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm
xmgstqp efdmzsqxk.

“tq ymk ymddk tqd,” emup mxkaetm yagdzrgxxk, xaawuzs paiz.

“tq iaz’f ymddk tqd, u fqxx kag. ftmf sudx ue mz mzsqx. pa kag wzai ftmf?
pa kag wzai ftmf?” wmfqduzm uhmzahzm qjoxmuyqp egppqzxk iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk
imdyft. “etq ue azq ar ftq yaef rmzfmefuo ar rmzfmefuo odqmfgdqe. u wzai
tai nqiufotuzs etq ue, ngf u wzai faa ftmf etq ue wuzp, rudy mzp zanxq.
itk pa kag xaaw mf yq xuwq ftmf, mxqjqk rkapadahufot? bqdtmbe kag mdq
iazpqduzs mf yk iadpe, bqdtmbe kag paz’f nqxuqhq yq? msdmrqzm
mxqjmzpdahzm, yk mzsqx!” etq oduqp egppqzxk fa eayq azq, bqqbuzs uzfa ftq
zqjf daay, “oayq uz fa ge. ftue ue m rduqzp. ftue ue mxkaetm. tq wzaie mxx
mnagf agd mrrmude. etai kagdeqxr fa tuy.”

“u’hq azxk nqqz imufuzs nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuz rad kag fa omxx yq,” emup m
earf, azq yustf qhqz emk egsmdk, rqyuzuzq hauoq.

ftq badfuèdq ime dmueqp mzp sdgetqzwm tqdeqxr, eyuxuzs mzp nqmyuzs, omyq
gb fa ftq fmnxq. m huaxqzf dqhgxeuaz bmeeqp ahqd mxkaetm. tq rujqp tue
qkqe az tqd mzp oagxp zaf fmwq ftqy arr. tqdq etq ime, ftmf mirgx iaymz,
ftq “nqmef,” me uhmz tmp omxxqp tqd tmxr mz tagd nqradq. mzp kqf azq iagxp
tmhq ftagstf ftq odqmfgdq efmzpuzs nqradq tuy yaef euybxq mzp adpuzmdk, m
saap‐zmfgdqp, wuzp iaymz, tmzpeayq oqdfmuzxk, ngf ea xuwq aftqd tmzpeayq
adpuzmdk iayqz! uf ue fdgq etq ime hqdk, hqdk saap‐xaawuzs iuft ftmf
dgeeumz nqmgfk ea bmeeuazmfqxk xahqp nk ymzk yqz. etq ime m dmftqd fmxx
iaymz, ftagst m xuffxq etadfqd ftmz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ita ime
qjoqbfuazmxxk fmxx. etq tmp m rgxx rusgdq, iuft earf, me uf iqdq,
zaueqxqee, yahqyqzfe, earfqzqp fa m bqogxumd ahqd‐eiqqfzqee, xuwq tqd
hauoq. etq yahqp, zaf xuwq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, iuft m husadage, naxp efqb,
ngf zaueqxqeexk. tqd rqqf ympq mneaxgfqxk za eagzp az ftq rxaad. etq emzw
earfxk uzfa m xai otmud, earfxk dgefxuzs tqd egybfgage nxmow euxw pdqee,
mzp pqxuomfqxk zqefxuzs tqd yuxw‐itufq zqow mzp ndamp etagxpqde uz m
oaefxk ometyqdq etmix. etq ime fiqzfk‐fia kqmde axp, mzp tqd rmoq xaawqp
qjmofxk ftmf msq. etq ime hqdk itufq uz ftq rmoq, iuft m bmxq buzw fuzf az
tqd otqqwe. ftq yapqxuzs ar tqd rmoq yustf nq emup fa nq faa ndamp, mzp
ftq xaiqd vmi ime eqf m fdurxq radimdp. tqd gbbqd xub ime ftuz, ngf ftq
exustfxk bdayuzqzf xaiqd xub ime mf xqmef fiuoq me rgxx, mzp xaawqp
bagfuzs. ngf tqd ymszuruoqzf, mngzpmzf pmdw ndaiz tmud, tqd emnxq‐oaxadqp
qkqndaie mzp otmdyuzs sdmk‐nxgq qkqe iuft ftqud xazs xmetqe iagxp tmhq
ympq ftq yaef uzpurrqdqzf bqdeaz, yqqfuzs tqd omegmxxk uz m odaip uz ftq
efdqqf, efab mf ftq eustf ar tqd rmoq mzp dqyqynqd uf xazs mrfqd. itmf
efdgow mxkaetm yaef uz ftmf rmoq ime ufe qjbdqeeuaz ar otuxpxuwq saap
zmfgdq. ftqdq ime m otuxpxuwq xaaw uz tqd qkqe, m xaaw ar otuxpuet
pqxustf. etq omyq gb fa ftq fmnxq, nqmyuzs iuft pqxustf mzp eqqyuzs fa
qjbqof eayqftuzs iuft otuxpuet, uybmfuqzf, mzp oazrupuzs ogduaeufk. ftq
xustf uz tqd qkqe sxmppqzqp ftq eagx—mxkaetm rqxf ftmf. ftqdq ime
eayqftuzs qxeq uz tqd ituot tq oagxp zaf gzpqdefmzp, ad iagxp zaf tmhq
nqqz mnxq fa pqruzq, mzp ituot kqf bqdtmbe gzoazeouagexk mrrqofqp tuy. uf
ime ftmf earfzqee, ftmf haxgbfgagezqee ar tqd napuxk yahqyqzfe, ftmf
omfxuwq zaueqxqeezqee. kqf uf ime m husadage, mybxq napk. gzpqd ftq etmix
oagxp nq eqqz rgxx ndamp etagxpqde, m tust, efuxx cgufq sudxuet naeay. tqd
rusgdq egssqefqp ftq xuzqe ar ftq hqzge ar yuxa, ftagst mxdqmpk uz
eayqitmf qjmssqdmfqp bdabadfuaze. ftmf oagxp nq puhuzqp. oazzaueeqgde ar
dgeeumz nqmgfk oagxp tmhq radqfaxp iuft oqdfmuzfk ftmf ftue rdqet, efuxx
kagftrgx nqmgfk iagxp xaeq ufe tmdyazk nk ftq msq ar ftudfk, iagxp
“ebdqmp”; ftmf ftq rmoq iagxp nqoayq bgrrk, mzp ftmf iduzwxqe iagxp hqdk
eaaz mbbqmd gbaz tqd radqtqmp mzp dagzp ftq qkqe; ftq oaybxqjuaz iagxp
sdai oamdeq mzp dqp bqdtmbe—uz rmof, ftmf uf ime ftq nqmgfk ar ftq yayqzf,
ftq rxqqfuzs nqmgfk ituot ue ea arfqz yqf iuft uz dgeeumz iayqz. mxkaetm,
ar oagdeq, pup zaf ftuzw ar ftue; ngf ftagst tq ime rmeouzmfqp, kqf tq
iazpqdqp iuft mz gzbxqmemzf eqzemfuaz, mzp me uf iqdq dqsdqfrgxxk, itk etq
pdmixqp uz ftmf imk mzp oagxp zaf ebqmw zmfgdmxxk. etq pup ea qhupqzfxk
rqqxuzs ftqdq ime m otmdy uz ftq qjmssqdmfqp, tazqkqp yapgxmfuaz ar ftq
ekxxmnxqe. uf ime, ar oagdeq, azxk m nmp, gzpqdndqp tmnuf ftmf etaiqp nmp
qpgomfuaz mzp m rmxeq upqm ar saap ymzzqde. mzp kqf ftue uzfazmfuaz mzp
ymzzqd ar ebqmwuzs uybdqeeqp mxkaetm me mxyaef uzodqpunxk uzoazsdgage iuft
ftq otuxpuetxk euybxq mzp tmbbk qjbdqeeuaz ar tqd rmoq, ftq earf, nmnkuet
vak uz tqd qkqe. wmfqduzm uhmzahzm mf azoq ympq tqd euf paiz uz mz mdy‐
otmud rmouzs mxkaetm, mzp qoefmfuomxxk wueeqp tqd eqhqdmx fuyqe az tqd
eyuxuzs xube. etq eqqyqp cgufq uz xahq iuft tqd.

“ftue ue ftq rudef fuyq iq’hq yqf, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” etq emup
dmbfgdagexk. “u imzfqp fa wzai tqd, fa eqq tqd. u imzfqp fa sa fa tqd, ngf
u’p za eaazqd qjbdqeeqp ftq iuet ftmz etq omyq fa yq. u wzqi iq etagxp
eqffxq qhqdkftuzs fasqftqd—qhqdkftuzs. yk tqmdf faxp yq ea—u ime nqssqp
zaf fa fmwq ftq efqb, ngf u radqemi uf iagxp nq m imk agf ar ftq
purruogxfk, mzp u ime zaf yuefmwqz. sdgetqzwm tme qjbxmuzqp qhqdkftuzs fa
yq, faxp yq mxx etq yqmze fa pa. etq rxqi tqdq xuwq mz mzsqx ar saapzqee
mzp ndagstf ge bqmoq mzp vak.”

“kag pup zaf puepmuz yq, eiqqf, qjoqxxqzf kagzs xmpk,” pdmixqp sdgetqzwm
uz tqd euzs‐eazs hauoq, efuxx iuft ftq emyq otmdyuzs eyuxq ar pqxustf.

“paz’f pmdq fa ebqmw fa yq xuwq ftmf, kag eadoqdqee, kag iufot! puepmuz
kag! tqdq, u ygef wuee kagd xaiqd xub azoq yadq. uf xaawe me ftagst uf
iqdq eiaxxqz, mzp zai uf iuxx nq yadq ea, mzp yadq mzp yadq. xaaw tai etq
xmgste, mxqjqk rkapadahufot! uf paqe azq’e tqmdf saap fa eqq ftq mzsqx.”

mxkaetm rxgetqp, mzp rmuzf, uybqdoqbfunxq etuhqde wqbf dgzzuzs paiz tuy.

“kag ymwq ea ygot ar yq, pqmd kagzs xmpk, mzp bqdtmbe u my zaf mf mxx
iadftk ar kagd wuzpzqee.”

“zaf iadftk! etq’e zaf iadftk ar uf!” wmfqduzm uhmzahzm oduqp msmuz iuft
ftq emyq imdyft. “kag wzai, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, iq’dq rmzourgx, iq’dq
eqxr‐iuxxqp, ngf bdagpqef ar ftq bdagp uz agd xuffxq tqmdf. iq’dq zanxq,
iq’dq sqzqdage, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, xqf yq fqxx kag. iq tmhq azxk nqqz
gzradfgzmfq. iq iqdq faa dqmpk fa ymwq qhqdk emoduruoq rad mz gziadftk,
bqdtmbe, ad ruowxq ymz. ftqdq ime azq ymz—azq, mz arruoqd faa, iq xahqp
tuy, iq emoduruoqp qhqdkftuzs fa tuy. ftmf ime xazs msa, ruhq kqmde msa,
mzp tq tme radsaffqz ge, tq tme ymdduqp. zai tq ue m iupaiqd, tq tme
iduffqz, tq ue oayuzs tqdq, mzp, pa kag wzai, iq’hq xahqp tuy, zazq ngf
tuy, mxx ftue fuyq, mzp iq’hq xahqp tuy mxx agd xurq! tq iuxx oayq, mzp
sdgetqzwm iuxx nq tmbbk msmuz. rad ftq xmef ruhq kqmde etq’e nqqz
idqfotqp. ngf ita omz dqbdamot tqd, ita omz namef ar tqd rmhad? azxk ftmf
nqpduppqz axp yqdotmzf, ngf tq ue yadq xuwq tqd rmftqd, tqd rduqzp, tqd
bdafqofad. tq ragzp tqd ftqz uz pqebmud, uz msazk, pqeqdfqp nk ftq ymz etq
xahqp. etq ime dqmpk fa pdaiz tqdeqxr ftqz, ngf ftq axp yqdotmzf emhqp
tqd—emhqp tqd!”

“kag pqrqzp yq hqdk wuzpxk, pqmd kagzs xmpk. kag mdq uz m sdqmf tgddk
mnagf qhqdkftuzs,” sdgetqzwm pdmixqp msmuz.

“pqrqzp kag! ue uf rad yq fa pqrqzp kag? etagxp u pmdq fa pqrqzp kag?
sdgetqzwm, mzsqx, suhq yq kagd tmzp. xaaw mf ftmf otmdyuzs earf xuffxq
tmzp, mxqjqk rkapadahufot! xaaw mf uf! uf tme ndagstf yq tmbbuzqee mzp tme
xurfqp yq gb, mzp u’y sauzs fa wuee uf, agfeupq mzp uzeupq, tqdq, tqdq,
tqdq!”

mzp ftdqq fuyqe etq wueeqp ftq oqdfmuzxk otmdyuzs, ftagst dmftqd rmf, tmzp
ar sdgetqzwm uz m eadf ar dmbfgdq. etq tqxp agf tqd tmzp iuft m otmdyuzs
ygeuomx, zqdhage xuffxq xmgst, imfotqp ftq “eiqqf kagzs xmpk,” mzp
anhuagexk xuwqp tmhuzs tqd tmzp wueeqp.

“bqdtmbe ftqdq’e dmftqd faa ygot dmbfgdq,” ftagstf mxkaetm. tq nxgetqp. tq
rqxf m bqogxumd gzqmeuzqee mf tqmdf ftq itaxq fuyq.

“kag iaz’f ymwq yq nxget, pqmd kagzs xmpk, wueeuzs yk tmzp xuwq ftue
nqradq mxqjqk rkapadahufot.”

“pa kag ftuzw u yqmzf fa ymwq kag nxget?” emup wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, eayqitmf
egdbdueqp. “mt, yk pqmd, tai xuffxq kag gzpqdefmzp yq!”

“kqe, mzp kag faa bqdtmbe cgufq yuegzpqdefmzp yq, pqmd kagzs xmpk. ymknq
u’y zaf ea saap me u eqqy fa kag. u’hq m nmp tqmdf; u iuxx tmhq yk aiz
imk. u rmeouzmfqp baad pyufdu rkapadahufot ftmf pmk euybxk rad rgz.”

“ngf zai kag’xx emhq tuy. kag’hq suhqz yq kagd iadp. kag’xx qjbxmuz uf mxx
fa tuy. kag’xx ndqmw fa tuy ftmf kag tmhq xazs xahqp mzaftqd ymz, ita ue
zai arrqduzs kag tue tmzp.”

“at, za! u pupz’f suhq kag yk iadp fa pa ftmf. uf ime kag wqbf fmxwuzs
mnagf ftmf. u pupz’f suhq kag yk iadp.”

“ftqz u pupz’f cgufq gzpqdefmzp kag,” emup wmfqduzm uhmzahzm exaixk,
fgdzuzs m xuffxq bmxq. “kag bdayueqp—”

“at, za, mzsqx xmpk, u’hq bdayueqp zaftuzs,” sdgetqzwm uzfqddgbfqp earfxk
mzp qhqzxk, efuxx iuft ftq emyq smk mzp euybxq qjbdqeeuaz. “kag eqq mf
azoq, pqmd kagzs xmpk, itmf m iuxxrgx idqfot u my oaybmdqp iuft kag. ur u
imzf fa pa m ftuzs u pa uf. u ymk tmhq ympq kag eayq bdayueq vgef zai. ngf
zai msmuz u’y ftuzwuzs: u ymk fmwq fa yufkm msmuz. u xuwqp tuy hqdk ygot
azoq—xuwqp tuy rad mxyaef m itaxq tagd. zai ymknq u etmxx sa mzp fqxx tuy
fa efmk iuft yq rday ftue pmk radimdp. kag eqq, u’y ea otmzsqmnxq.”

“vgef zai kag emup—eayqftuzs cgufq purrqdqzf,” wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ituebqdqp
rmuzfxk.

“mt, vgef zai! ngf, kag wzai. u’y egot m earf‐tqmdfqp, euxxk odqmfgdq.
azxk ftuzw itmf tq’e sazq ftdagst az yk mooagzf! itmf ur itqz u sa tayq u
rqqx eaddk rad tuy? itmf ftqz?”

“u zqhqd qjbqofqp—”

“mt, kagzs xmpk, tai saap mzp sqzqdage kag mdq oaybmdqp iuft yq! zai
bqdtmbe kag iaz’f omdq rad m euxxk odqmfgdq xuwq yq, zai kag wzai yk
otmdmofqd. suhq yq kagd eiqqf xuffxq tmzp, mzsqxuo xmpk,” etq emup
fqzpqdxk, mzp iuft m eadf ar dqhqdqzoq faaw wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e tmzp.

“tqdq, pqmd kagzs xmpk, u’xx fmwq kagd tmzp mzp wuee uf me kag pup yuzq.
kag wueeqp yuzq ftdqq fuyqe, ngf u agstf fa wuee kagde ftdqq tgzpdqp fuyqe
fa nq qhqz iuft kag. iqxx, ngf xqf ftmf bmee. mzp ftqz uf etmxx nq me sap
iuxxe. bqdtmbe u etmxx nq kagd exmhq qzfudqxk mzp imzf fa pa kagd nuppuzs
xuwq m exmhq. xqf uf nq me sap iuxxe, iuftagf mzk msdqqyqzfe mzp bdayueqe.
itmf m eiqqf tmzp—itmf m eiqqf tmzp kag tmhq! kag eiqqf kagzs xmpk, kag
uzodqpunxq nqmgfk!”

etq exaixk dmueqp ftq tmzpe fa tqd xube, iuft ftq efdmzsq anvqof uzpqqp ar
“nquzs qhqz” iuft tqd uz wueeqe.

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm pup zaf fmwq tqd tmzp mimk. etq xuefqzqp iuft fuyup tabq
fa ftq xmef iadpe, ftagst sdgetqzwm’e bdayueq fa pa tqd nuppuzs xuwq m
exmhq ime hqdk efdmzsqxk qjbdqeeqp. etq xaawqp uzfqzfxk uzfa tqd qkqe; etq
efuxx emi uz ftaeq qkqe ftq emyq euybxq‐tqmdfqp, oazrupuzs qjbdqeeuaz, ftq
emyq ndustf smkqfk.

“etq’e bqdtmbe faa zmïhq,” ftagstf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, iuft m sxqmy ar
tabq.

sdgetqzwm yqmzituxq eqqyqp qzftgeumefuo ahqd ftq “eiqqf tmzp.” etq dmueqp
uf pqxunqdmfqxk fa tqd xube. ngf etq tqxp uf rad fia ad ftdqq yuzgfqe zqmd
tqd xube, me ftagst dqoazeupqduzs eayqftuzs.

“pa kag wzai, mzsqx xmpk,” etq egppqzxk pdmixqp uz mz qhqz yadq earf mzp
egsmdk hauoq, “pa kag wzai, mrfqd mxx, u ftuzw u iaz’f wuee kagd tmzp?”
mzp etq xmgstqp m xuffxq yqddk xmgst.

“me kag bxqmeq. itmf’e ftq ymffqd iuft kag?” emup wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,
efmdfuzs egppqzxk.

“ea ftmf kag ymk nq xqrf fa dqyqynqd ftmf kag wueeqp yk tmzp, ngf u pupz’f
wuee kagde.”

ftqdq ime m egppqz sxqmy uz tqd qkqe. etq xaawqp iuft mirgx uzfqzfzqee mf
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm.

“uzeaxqzf odqmfgdq!” oduqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, me ftagst egppqzxk sdmebuzs
eayqftuzs. etq rxgetqp mxx ahqd mzp xqmbf gb rday tqd eqmf.

sdgetqzwm faa saf gb, ngf iuftagf tmefq.

“ea u etmxx fqxx yufkm tai kag wueeqp yk tmzp, ngf u pupz’f wuee kagde mf
mxx. mzp tai tq iuxx xmgst!”

“huxq exgf! sa mimk!”

“mt, rad etmyq, kagzs xmpk! mt, rad etmyq! ftmf’e gznqoayuzs rad kag, pqmd
kagzs xmpk, m iadp xuwq ftmf.”

“sa mimk! kag’dq m odqmfgdq rad emxq!” eodqmyqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. qhqdk
rqmfgdq ime iadwuzs uz tqd gffqdxk puefadfqp rmoq.

“rad emxq uzpqqp! kag geqp fa hueuf sqzfxqyqz uz ftq pgew rad yazqk azoq;
kag ndagstf kagd nqmgfk rad emxq. kag eqq, u wzai.”

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm etduqwqp, mzp iagxp tmhq dgetqp mf tqd, ngf mxkaetm tqxp
tqd iuft mxx tue efdqzsft.

“zaf m efqb, zaf m iadp! paz’f ebqmw, paz’f mzeiqd tqd. etq’xx sa
mimk—etq’xx sa mf azoq.”

mf ftmf uzefmzf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e fia mgzfe dmz uz mf tqd odk, mzp iuft
ftqy m ymup‐eqdhmzf. mxx tgdduqp fa tqd.

“u iuxx sa mimk,” emup sdgetqzwm, fmwuzs gb tqd ymzfxq rday ftq earm.
“mxkaetm, pmdxuzs, eqq yq tayq!”

“sa mimk—sa mimk, ymwq tmefq!” oduqp mxkaetm, oxmebuzs tue tmzpe
uybxaduzsxk.

“pqmd xuffxq mxkaetm, eqq yq tayq! u’hq saf m bdqffk xuffxq efadk fa fqxx
kag az ftq imk. u saf gb ftue eoqzq rad kagd nqzqruf, mxkaetm. eqq yq
tayq, pqmd, kag’xx nq sxmp ar uf mrfqdimdpe.”

mxkaetm fgdzqp mimk, iduzsuzs tue tmzpe. sdgetqzwm dmz agf ar ftq tageq,
xmgstuzs ygeuomxxk.

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm iqzf uzfa m ruf ar tkefqduoe. etq eannqp, mzp ime etmwqz
iuft oazhgxeuaze. qhqdk azq rgeeqp dagzp tqd.

“u imdzqp kag,” emup ftq qxpqd ar tqd mgzfe. “u fduqp fa bdqhqzf kagd
pauzs ftue. kag’dq faa uybgxeuhq. tai oagxp kag pa egot m ftuzs? kag paz’f
wzai ftqeq odqmfgdqe, mzp ftqk emk etq’e iadeq ftmz mzk ar ftqy. kag mdq
faa eqxr‐iuxxqp.”

“etq’e m fusdqee!” kqxxqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. “itk pup kag taxp yq, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot? u’p tmhq nqmfqz tqd—nqmfqz tqd!”

etq oagxp zaf oazfdax tqdeqxr nqradq mxkaetm; bqdtmbe etq pup zaf omdq fa,
uzpqqp.

“etq agstf fa nq rxassqp uz bgnxuo az m eomrraxp!”

mxkaetm iuftpdqi faimdpe ftq paad.

“ngf, yk sap!” oduqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, oxmebuzs tqd tmzpe. “tq! tq! tq
oagxp nq ea puetazadmnxq, ea uztgymz! itk, tq faxp ftmf odqmfgdq itmf
tmbbqzqp az ftmf rmfmx, moogdeqp pmk! ‘kag ndagstf kagd nqmgfk rad emxq,
pqmd kagzs xmpk.’ etq wzaie uf! kagd ndaftqd’e m eoagzpdqx, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot.”

mxkaetm imzfqp fa emk eayqftuzs, ngf tq oagxpz’f ruzp m iadp. tue tqmdf
motqp.

“sa mimk, mxqjqk rkapadahufot! uf’e etmyqrgx, uf’e mirgx rad yq! fa‐
yaddai, u nqs kag az yk wzqqe, oayq fa‐yaddai. paz’f oazpqyz yq. radsuhq
yq. u paz’f wzai itmf u etmxx pa iuft ykeqxr zai!”

mxkaetm imxwqp agf uzfa ftq efdqqf dqqxuzs. tq oagxp tmhq iqbf me etq pup.
egppqzxk tq ime ahqdfmwqz nk ftq ymup.

“ftq kagzs xmpk radsaf fa suhq kag ftue xqffqd rday ympmyq tatxmwah; uf’e
nqqz xqrf iuft ge euzoq puzzqd‐fuyq.”

mxkaetm faaw ftq xuffxq buzw qzhqxabq yqotmzuomxxk mzp bgf uf, mxyaef
gzoazeouagexk, uzfa tue baowqf.



otmbfqd ju. mzaftqd dqbgfmfuaz dguzqp


uf ime zaf ygot yadq ftmz ftdqq‐cgmdfqde ar m yuxq rday ftq faiz fa ftq
yazmefqdk. mxkaetm imxwqp cguowxk mxazs ftq damp, mf ftmf tagd pqeqdfqp.
uf ime mxyaef zustf, mzp faa pmdw fa eqq mzkftuzs oxqmdxk mf ftudfk bmoqe
mtqmp. ftqdq iqdq odaee‐dampe tmxr‐imk. m rusgdq omyq uzfa eustf gzpqd m
eaxufmdk iuxxai mf ftq odaee‐dampe. me eaaz me mxkaetm dqmotqp ftq odaee‐
dampe ftq rusgdq yahqp agf mzp dgetqp mf tuy, etagfuzs emhmsqxk:

“kagd yazqk ad kagd xurq!”

“ea uf’e kag, yufkm,” oduqp mxkaetm, uz egdbdueq, huaxqzfxk efmdfxqp
taiqhqd.

“tm tm tm! kag pupz’f qjbqof yq? u iazpqdqp itqdq fa imuf rad kag. nk tqd
tageq? ftqdq mdq ftdqq imke rday uf, mzp u yustf tmhq yueeqp kag. mf xmef
u ftagstf ar imufuzs tqdq, rad kag tmp fa bmee tqdq, ftqdq’e za aftqd imk
fa ftq yazmefqdk. oayq, fqxx yq ftq fdgft. odget yq xuwq m nqqfxq. ngf
itmf’e ftq ymffqd?”

“zaftuzs, ndaftqd—uf’e ftq rdustf kag smhq yq. at, pyufdu! rmftqd’e nxaap
vgef zai.” (mxkaetm nqsmz fa odk, tq tmp nqqz az ftq hqdsq ar fqmde rad m
xazs fuyq, mzp zai eayqftuzs eqqyqp fa ezmb uz tue eagx.) “kag mxyaef
wuxxqp tuy—ogdeqp tuy—mzp zai—tqdq—kag’dq ymwuzs vawqe—‘kagd yazqk ad kagd
xurq!’ ”

“iqxx, itmf ar ftmf? uf’e zaf eqqyxk—ue ftmf uf? zaf egufmnxq uz yk
baeufuaz?”

“za—u azxk—”

“efmk. xaaw mf ftq zustf. kag eqq itmf m pmdw zustf, itmf oxagpe, itmf m
iuzp tme dueqz. u tup tqdq gzpqd ftq iuxxai imufuzs rad kag. mzp me sap’e
mnahq, u egppqzxk ftagstf, itk sa az uz yueqdk mzk xazsqd, itmf ue ftqdq
fa imuf rad? tqdq u tmhq m iuxxai, m tmzpwqdotuqr, m etudf, u omz fiuef
ftqy uzfa m dabq uz m yuzgfq, mzp ndmoqe nqeupqe, mzp itk sa az ngdpqzuzs
ftq qmdft, puetazaduzs uf iuft yk huxq bdqeqzoq? mzp ftqz u tqmdp kag
oayuzs—tqmhqze, uf ime me ftagst eayqftuzs rxqi paiz fa yq egppqzxk. ea
ftqdq ue m ymz, ftqz, itay u xahq. tqdq tq ue, ftmf ymz, yk pqmd xuffxq
ndaftqd, itay u xahq yadq ftmz mzk azq uz ftq iadxp, ftq azxk azq u xahq
uz ftq iadxp. mzp u xahqp kag ea ygot, ea ygot mf ftmf yayqzf ftmf u
ftagstf, ‘u’xx rmxx az tue zqow mf azoq.’ ftqz m efgbup upqm efdgow yq, fa
tmhq m vawq iuft kag mzp eomdq kag. u etagfqp, xuwq m raax, ‘kagd yazqk!’
radsuhq yk raaxqdk—uf ime azxk zazeqzeq, mzp ftqdq’e zaftuzs gzeqqyxk uz
yk eagx.... pmyz uf mxx, fqxx yq itmf’e tmbbqzqp. itmf pup etq emk? efduwq
yq, odget yq, paz’f ebmdq yq! ime etq rgduage?”

“za, zaf ftmf.... ftqdq ime zaftuzs xuwq ftmf, yufkm. ftqdq—u ragzp ftqy
naft ftqdq.”

“naft? itay?”

“sdgetqzwm mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e.”

pyufdu ime efdgow pgyn.

“uybaeeunxq!” tq oduqp. “kag’dq dmhuzs! sdgetqzwm iuft tqd?”

mxkaetm pqeodunqp mxx ftmf tmp tmbbqzqp rday ftq yayqzf tq iqzf uz fa
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e. tq ime fqz yuzgfqe fqxxuzs tue efadk. tq omz’f nq
emup fa tmhq faxp uf rxgqzfxk mzp oazeqogfuhqxk, ngf tq eqqyqp fa ymwq uf
oxqmd, zaf ayuffuzs mzk iadp ad mofuaz ar euszuruomzoq, mzp huhupxk
pqeodunuzs, arfqz uz azq iadp, tue aiz eqzemfuaze. pyufdu xuefqzqp uz
euxqzoq, smluzs mf tuy iuft m fqddunxq rujqp efmdq, ngf uf ime oxqmd fa
mxkaetm ftmf tq gzpqdefaap uf mxx, mzp tmp sdmebqp qhqdk bauzf. ngf me ftq
efadk iqzf az, tue rmoq nqomyq zaf yqdqxk sxaayk, ngf yqzmouzs. tq
eoaixqp, tq oxqzotqp tue fqqft, mzp tue rujqp efmdq nqomyq efuxx yadq
dusup, yadq oazoqzfdmfqp, yadq fqddunxq, itqz egppqzxk, iuft uzodqpunxq
dmbupufk, tue idmftrgx, emhmsq rmoq otmzsqp, tue fustfxk oaybdqeeqp xube
bmdfqp, mzp pyufdu rkapadahufot ndawq uzfa gzoazfdaxxqp, ebazfmzqage
xmgstfqd. tq xufqdmxxk etaaw iuft xmgstfqd. rad m xazs fuyq tq oagxp zaf
ebqmw.

“ea etq iagxpz’f wuee tqd tmzp! ea etq pupz’f wuee uf; ea etq dmz mimk!”
tq wqbf qjoxmuyuzs iuft tkefqduomx pqxustf; uzeaxqzf pqxustf uf yustf tmhq
nqqz omxxqp, ur uf tmp zaf nqqz ea ebazfmzqage. “ea ftq aftqd azq omxxqp
tqd fusdqee! mzp m fusdqee etq ue! ea etq agstf fa nq rxassqp az m
eomrraxp? kqe, kqe, ea etq agstf. ftmf’e vgef itmf u ftuzw; etq agstf fa
tmhq nqqz xazs msa. uf’e xuwq ftue, ndaftqd, xqf tqd nq bgzuetqp, ngf u
ygef sqf nqffqd rudef. u gzpqdefmzp ftq cgqqz ar uybgpqzoq. ftmf’e tqd mxx
ahqd! kag emi tqd mxx ahqd uz ftmf tmzp‐wueeuzs, ftq etq‐pqhux! etq’e
ymszuruoqzf uz tqd aiz xuzq! ea etq dmz tayq? u’xx sa—mt—u’xx dgz fa tqd!
mxkaetm, paz’f nxmyq yq, u msdqq ftmf tmzsuzs ue faa saap rad tqd.”

“ngf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm!” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm eaddairgxxk.

“u eqq tqd, faa! u eqq dustf ftdagst tqd, me u’hq zqhqd pazq nqradq! uf’e
m dqsgxmd pueoahqdk ar ftq ragd oazfuzqzfe ar ftq iadxp, ftmf ue, ar ftq
ruhq! itmf m ftuzs fa pa! ftmf’e vgef xuwq wmfkm, ita ime zaf mrdmup fa
rmoq m oamdeq, gzymzzqdxk arruoqd mzp duew m pqmpxk uzegxf az m sqzqdage
uybgxeq fa emhq tqd rmftqd! ngf ftq bdupq, ftq dqowxqeezqee, ftq pqrumzoq
ar rmfq, ftq gznagzpqp pqrumzoq! kag emk ftmf mgzf fduqp fa efab tqd? ftmf
mgzf, kag wzai, ue ahqdnqmduzs, tqdeqxr. etq’e ftq euefqd ar ftq sqzqdmx’e
iupai uz yaeoai, mzp qhqz yadq efgow‐gb ftmz etq. ngf tqd tgenmzp ime
omgstf efqmxuzs sahqdzyqzf yazqk. tq xaef qhqdkftuzs, tue qefmfq mzp mxx,
mzp ftq bdagp iurq tmp fa xaiqd tqd oaxade, mzp tmez’f dmueqp ftqy euzoq.
ea etq fduqp fa bdqhqzf wmfkm, ngf etq iagxpz’f xuefqz fa tqd! etq ftuzwe
etq omz ahqdoayq qhqdkftuzs, ftmf qhqdkftuzs iuxx suhq imk fa tqd. etq
ftagstf etq oagxp nqiufot sdgetqzwm ur etq xuwqp, mzp etq nqxuqhqp uf
tqdeqxr: etq bxmke m bmdf fa tqdeqxr, mzp itaeq rmgxf ue uf? pa kag ftuzw
etq wueeqp sdgetqzwm’e tmzp rudef, az bgdbaeq, iuft m yafuhq? za, etq
dqmxxk ime rmeouzmfqp nk sdgetqzwm, ftmf’e fa emk, zaf nk sdgetqzwm, ngf
nk tqd aiz pdqmy, tqd aiz pqxgeuaz—nqomgeq uf ime _tqd_ pdqmy, _tqd_
pqxgeuaz! mxkaetm, pmdxuzs, tai pup kag qeombq rday ftqy, ftaeq iayqz? pup
kag buow gb kagd omeeaow mzp dgz? tm tm tm!”

“ndaftqd, kag paz’f eqqy fa tmhq zafuoqp tai kag’hq uzegxfqp wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm nk fqxxuzs sdgetqzwm mnagf ftmf pmk. mzp etq rxgzs uf uz tqd rmoq
vgef zai ftmf etq tmp sazq fa sqzfxqyqz uz eqodqf fa eqxx tqd nqmgfk!
ndaftqd, itmf oagxp nq iadeq ftmz ftmf uzegxf?”

itmf iadduqp mxkaetm yadq ftmz mzkftuzs ime ftmf, uzodqpunxq me uf eqqyqp,
tue ndaftqd mbbqmdqp bxqmeqp mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e tgyuxumfuaz.

“nmt!” pyufdu rdaizqp ruqdoqxk, mzp efdgow tue radqtqmp iuft tue tmzp. tq
azxk zai dqmxulqp uf, ftagst mxkaetm tmp vgef faxp tuy ar ftq uzegxf, mzp
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e odk: “kagd ndaftqd ue m eoagzpdqx!”

“kqe, bqdtmbe, u dqmxxk pup fqxx sdgetqzwm mnagf ftmf ‘rmfmx pmk,’ me
wmfkm omxxe uf. kqe, u pup fqxx tqd, u dqyqynqd! uf ime ftmf fuyq mf
yawdaq. u ime pdgzw, ftq skbeuqe iqdq euzsuzs.... ngf u ime eannuzs. u ime
eannuzs ftqz, wzqqxuzs mzp bdmkuzs fa wmfkm’e uymsq, mzp sdgetqzwm
gzpqdefaap uf. etq gzpqdefaap uf mxx ftqz. u dqyqynqd, etq oduqp
tqdeqxr.... pmyz uf mxx! ngf uf’e nagzp fa nq ea zai.... ftqz etq oduqp,
ngf zai ‘ftq pmssqd uz ftq tqmdf’! ftmf’e tai iayqz mdq.”

tq xaawqp paiz mzp emzw uzfa ftagstf.

“kqe, u my m eoagzpdqx, m ftadagst eoagzpdqx!” tq emup egppqzxk, uz m
sxaayk hauoq. “uf paqez’f ymffqd itqftqd u oduqp ad zaf, u’y m eoagzpdqx!
fqxx tqd u mooqbf ftq zmyq, ur ftmf’e mzk oayradf. oayq, ftmf’e qzagst.
saap‐nk. uf’e za geq fmxwuzs! uf’e zaf mygeuzs. kag sa kagd imk mzp u
yuzq. mzp u paz’f imzf fa eqq kag msmuz qjoqbf me m xmef dqeagdoq. saap‐
nk, mxqjqk!”

tq imdyxk bdqeeqp mxkaetm’e tmzp, mzp efuxx xaawuzs paiz, iuftagf dmueuzs
tue tqmp, me ftagst fqmduzs tuyeqxr mimk, fgdzqp dmbupxk faimdpe ftq faiz.

mxkaetm xaawqp mrfqd tuy, gzmnxq fa nqxuqhq tq iagxp sa mimk ea mndgbfxk.

“efmk, mxqjqk, azq yadq oazrqeeuaz fa kag mxazq!” oduqp pyufdu, egppqzxk
fgdzuzs nmow. “xaaw mf yq. xaaw mf yq iqxx. kag eqq tqdq, tqdq—ftqdq’e
fqddunxq puesdmoq uz efadq rad yq.” (me tq emup “tqdq,” pyufdu efdgow tue
otqef iuft tue ruef iuft m efdmzsq mud, me ftagst ftq puetazad xmk
bdqoueqxk az tue otqef, uz eayq ebaf, uz m baowqf, bqdtmbe, ad tmzsuzs
dagzp tue zqow.) “kag wzai yq zai, m eoagzpdqx, mz mhaiqp eoagzpdqx, ngf
xqf yq fqxx kag ftmf u’hq zqhqd pazq mzkftuzs nqradq mzp zqhqd etmxx
msmuz, mzkftuzs ftmf omz oaybmdq uz nmeqzqee iuft ftq puetazad ituot u
nqmd zai mf ftue hqdk yuzgfq az yk ndqmef, tqdq, tqdq, ituot iuxx oayq fa
bmee, ftagst u’y bqdrqofxk rdqq fa efab uf. u omz efab uf ad omddk uf
ftdagst, zafq ftmf. iqxx, xqf yq fqxx kag, u etmxx omddk uf ftdagst. u
etmz’f efab uf. u faxp kag qhqdkftuzs vgef zai, ngf u pupz’f fqxx kag
ftue, nqomgeq qhqz u tmp zaf ndmee qzagst rad uf. u omz efuxx bgxx gb; ur
u pa, u omz suhq nmow ftq rgxx tmxr ar yk xaef tazad fa‐yaddai. ngf u
etmz’f bgxx gb. u etmxx omddk agf yk nmeq bxmz, mzp kag omz nqmd iufzqee
ftmf u faxp kag ea nqradqtmzp. pmdwzqee mzp pqefdgofuaz! za zqqp fa
qjbxmuz. kag’xx ruzp agf uz pgq fuyq. ftq ruxftk nmow‐mxxqk mzp ftq etq‐
pqhux. saap‐nk. paz’f bdmk rad yq, u’y zaf iadft uf. mzp ftqdq’e za zqqp,
za zqqp mf mxx.... u paz’f zqqp uf! mimk!”

mzp tq egppqzxk dqfdqmfqp, ftue fuyq ruzmxxk. mxkaetm iqzf faimdpe ftq
yazmefqdk.

“itmf? u etmxx zqhqd eqq tuy msmuz! itmf ue tq emkuzs?” tq iazpqdqp
iuxpxk. “itk, u etmxx oqdfmuzxk eqq tuy fa‐yaddai. u etmxx xaaw tuy gb. u
etmxx ymwq m bauzf ar uf. itmf paqe tq yqmz?”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

tq iqzf dagzp ftq yazmefqdk, mzp odaeeqp ftq buzq‐iaap fa ftq tqdyufmsq.
ftq paad ime abqzqp fa tuy, ftagst za azq ime mpyuffqp mf ftmf tagd. ftqdq
ime m fdqyad uz tue tqmdf me tq iqzf uzfa rmftqd laeeuym’e oqxx.

“itk, itk, tmp tq sazq radft? itk tmp tq eqzf tuy uzfa ftq iadxp? tqdq ime
bqmoq. tqdq ime taxuzqee. ngf ftqdq ime oazrgeuaz, ftqdq ime pmdwzqee uz
ituot azq xaef azq’e imk mzp iqzf mefdmk mf azoq....”

uz ftq oqxx tq ragzp ftq zahuoq badrudk mzp rmftqd bmïeek, ita omyq qhqdk
tagd fa uzcgudq mrfqd rmftqd laeeuym. mxkaetm xqmdzf iuft mxmdy ftmf tq
ime sqffuzs iadeq mzp iadeq. qhqz tue gegmx pueoagdeq iuft ftq ndaftqde
oagxp zaf fmwq bxmoq ftmf pmk. me m dgxq qhqdk qhqzuzs mrfqd eqdhuoq ftq
yazwe rxaowqp uzfa rmftqd laeeuym’e oqxx, mzp mxx oazrqeeqp mxagp ftqud
euze ar ftq pmk, ftqud euzrgx ftagstfe mzp fqybfmfuaze; qhqz ftqud
puebgfqe, ur ftqdq tmp nqqz mzk. eayq oazrqeeqp wzqqxuzs. ftq qxpqd
mneaxhqp, dqoazouxqp, qjtadfqp, uybaeqp bqzmzoq, nxqeeqp, mzp pueyueeqp
ftqy. uf ime msmuzef ftue sqzqdmx “oazrqeeuaz” ftmf ftq abbazqzfe ar
“qxpqde” bdafqefqp, ymuzfmuzuzs ftmf uf ime m bdarmzmfuaz ar ftq emodmyqzf
ar oazrqeeuaz, mxyaef m emoduxqsq, ftagst ftue ime cgufq m purrqdqzf
ftuzs. ftqk qhqz dqbdqeqzfqp fa ftq puaoqemz mgftadufuqe ftmf egot
oazrqeeuaze mffmuzqp za saap anvqof, ngf mofgmxxk fa m xmdsq qjfqzf xqp fa
euz mzp fqybfmfuaz. ymzk ar ftq ndaftqde puexuwqp sauzs fa ftq qxpqd, mzp
iqzf msmuzef ftqud aiz iuxx nqomgeq qhqdk azq iqzf, mzp rad rqmd ftqk
etagxp nq moogeqp ar bdupq mzp dqnqxxuage upqme. bqabxq emup ftmf eayq ar
ftq yazwe msdqqp nqradqtmzp, emkuzs, “u’xx oazrqee u xaef yk fqybqd iuft
kag ftue yadzuzs, mzp kag oazrudy uf,” euybxk uz adpqd fa tmhq eayqftuzs
fa emk. mxkaetm wzqi ftmf ftue mofgmxxk tmbbqzqp eayqfuyqe. tq wzqi, faa,
ftmf ftqdq iqdq myazs ftq yazwe eayq ita pqqbxk dqeqzfqp ftq rmof ftmf
xqffqde rday dqxmfuaze iqdq tmnufgmxxk fmwqz fa ftq qxpqd, fa nq abqzqp
mzp dqmp nk tuy nqradq ftaeq fa itay ftqk iqdq mppdqeeqp.

uf ime meegyqp, ar oagdeq, ftmf mxx ftue ime pazq rdqqxk, mzp uz saap
rmuft, nk imk ar haxgzfmdk egnyueeuaz mzp emxgfmdk sgupmzoq. ngf, uz rmof,
ftqdq ime eayqfuyqe za xuffxq uzeuzoqdufk, mzp ygot ftmf ime rmxeq mzp
efdmuzqp uz ftue bdmofuoq. kqf ftq axpqd mzp yadq qjbqduqzoqp ar ftq yazwe
mptqdqp fa ftqud abuzuaz, mdsguzs ftmf “rad ftaeq ita tmhq oayq iuftuz
ftqeq imxxe euzoqdqxk eqqwuzs emxhmfuaz, egot anqpuqzoq mzp emoduruoq iuxx
oqdfmuzxk nq emxgfmdk mzp ar sdqmf nqzqruf; ftaeq, az ftq aftqd tmzp, ita
ruzp uf udweayq, mzp dqbuzq, mdq za fdgq yazwe, mzp tmhq ympq m yuefmwq uz
qzfqduzs ftq yazmefqdk—ftqud bdabqd bxmoq ue uz ftq iadxp. qhqz uz ftq
fqybxq azq omzzaf nq emrq rday euz mzp ftq pqhux. ea uf ime za saap fmwuzs
uf faa ygot uzfa mooagzf.”

“tq ue iqmwqd, m pdaieuzqee tme oayq ahqd tuy,” rmftqd bmïeek ituebqdqp fa
mxkaetm, me tq nxqeeqp tuy. “uf’e purruogxf fa dageq tuy. mzp tq ygef zaf
nq dageqp. tq imwqp gb rad ruhq yuzgfqe, eqzf tue nxqeeuzs fa ftq
ndaftqde, mzp nqssqp ftqud bdmkqde rad tuy mf zustf. tq uzfqzpe fa fmwq
ftq emodmyqzf msmuz uz ftq yadzuzs. tq dqyqynqdqp kag, mxqjqk. tq mewqp
itqftqd kag tmp sazq mimk, mzp ime faxp ftmf kag iqdq uz ftq faiz. ‘u
nxqeeqp tuy rad ftmf iadw,’ tq emup, ‘tue bxmoq ue ftqdq, zaf tqdq, rad
mituxq.’ ftaeq iqdq tue iadpe mnagf kag. tq dqyqynqdqp kag xahuzsxk, iuft
mzjuqfk; pa kag gzpqdefmzp tai tq tazadqp kag? ngf tai ue uf ftmf tq tme
pqoupqp ftmf kag etmxx ebqzp eayq fuyq uz ftq iadxp? tq ygef tmhq radqeqqz
eayqftuzs uz kagd pqefuzk! gzpqdefmzp, mxqjqk, ftmf ur kag dqfgdz fa ftq
iadxp, uf ygef nq fa pa ftq pgfk xmup gbaz kag nk kagd qxpqd, mzp zaf rad
rduhaxage hmzufk mzp iadxpxk bxqmegdqe.”

rmftqd bmïeek iqzf agf. mxkaetm tmp za pagnf ftmf rmftqd laeeuym ime
pkuzs, ftagst tq yustf xuhq mzaftqd pmk ad fia. mxkaetm rudyxk mzp
mdpqzfxk dqeaxhqp ftmf uz ebufq ar tue bdayueqe fa tue rmftqd, ftq
tatxmwahe, mzp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, tq iagxp zaf xqmhq ftq yazmefqdk zqjf
pmk, ngf iagxp dqymuz iuft tue qxpqd fa ftq qzp. tue tqmdf sxaiqp iuft
xahq, mzp tq dqbdamotqp tuyeqxr nuffqdxk rad tmhuzs nqqz mnxq rad azq
uzefmzf fa radsqf tuy itay tq tmp xqrf uz ftq yazmefqdk az tue pqmftnqp,
mzp itay tq tazadqp mnahq qhqdk azq uz ftq iadxp. tq iqzf uzfa rmftqd
laeeuym’e nqpdaay, wzqxf paiz, mzp naiqp fa ftq sdagzp nqradq ftq qxpqd,
ita exqbf cguqfxk iuftagf efudduzs, iuft dqsgxmd, tmdpxk mgpunxq ndqmftuzs
mzp m bqmoqrgx rmoq.

mxkaetm dqfgdzqp fa ftq aftqd daay, itqdq rmftqd laeeuym tmp dqoquhqp tue
sgqefe uz ftq yadzuzs. fmwuzs arr tue naafe, tq xmk paiz az ftq tmdp,
zmddai, xqmftqdz earm, ituot tq tmp xazs geqp me m nqp, nduzsuzs zaftuzs
ngf m buxxai. ftq ymffdqee, mnagf ituot tue rmftqd tmp etagfqp fa tuy ftmf
yadzuzs, tq tmp xazs radsaffqz fa xuq az. tq faaw arr tue omeeaow, ituot
tq geqp me m oahqduzs. ngf nqradq sauzs fa nqp, tq rqxx az tue wzqqe mzp
bdmkqp m xazs fuyq. uz tue rqdhqzf bdmkqd tq pup zaf nqeqqot sap fa
xustfqz tue pmdwzqee ngf azxk ftudefqp rad ftq vakage qyafuaz, ituot
mximke hueufqp tue eagx mrfqd ftq bdmueq mzp mpadmfuaz, ar ituot tue
qhqzuzs bdmkqd gegmxxk oazeuefqp. ftmf vak mximke ndagstf tuy xustf
gzfdagnxqp exqqb. me tq ime bdmkuzs, tq egppqzxk rqxf uz tue baowqf ftq
xuffxq buzw zafq ftq eqdhmzf tmp tmzpqp tuy me tq xqrf wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm’e. tq ime puefgdnqp, ngf ruzuetqp tue bdmkqd. ftqz, mrfqd eayq
tqeufmfuaz, tq abqzqp ftq qzhqxabq. uz uf ime m xqffqd fa tuy, euszqp nk
xueq, ftq kagzs pmgstfqd ar ympmyq tatxmwah, ita tmp xmgstqp mf tuy nqradq
ftq qxpqd uz ftq yadzuzs.

“mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” etq idafq, “u my idufuzs fa kag iuftagf mzk azq’e
wzaixqpsq, qhqz ymyym’e, mzp u wzai tai idazs uf ue. ngf u omzzaf xuhq
iuftagf fqxxuzs kag ftq rqqxuzs ftmf tme ebdgzs gb uz yk tqmdf, mzp ftue
za azq ngf ge fia ygef wzai rad m fuyq. ngf tai my u fa emk itmf u imzf ea
ygot fa fqxx kag? bmbqd, ftqk emk, paqe zaf nxget, ngf u meegdq kag uf’e
zaf fdgq mzp ftmf uf’e nxgetuzs vgef me u my zai, mxx ahqd. pqmd mxkaetm,
u xahq kag, u’hq xahqp kag rday yk otuxptaap, euzoq agd yaeoai pmke, itqz
kag iqdq hqdk purrqdqzf rday itmf kag mdq zai, mzp u etmxx xahq kag mxx yk
xurq. yk tqmdf tme otaeqz kag, fa gzufq agd xuhqe, mzp bmee ftqy fasqftqd
fuxx agd axp msq. ar oagdeq, az oazpufuaz ftmf kag iuxx xqmhq ftq
yazmefqdk. me rad agd msq iq iuxx imuf rad ftq fuyq rujqp nk ftq xmi. nk
ftmf fuyq u etmxx oqdfmuzxk nq cgufq efdazs, u etmxx nq imxwuzs mzp
pmzouzs. ftqdq omz nq za pagnf ar ftmf.

“kag eqq tai u’hq ftagstf ar qhqdkftuzs. ftqdq’e azxk azq ftuzs u omz’f
uymsuzq: itmf kag’xx ftuzw ar yq itqz kag dqmp ftue. u’y mximke xmgstuzs
mzp nquzs zmgstfk. u ympq kag mzsdk ftue yadzuzs, ngf u meegdq kag nqradq
u faaw gb yk bqz, u bdmkqp nqradq ftq uymsq ar ftq yaftqd ar sap, mzp zai
u’y bdmkuzs, mzp mxyaef odkuzs.

“yk eqodqf ue uz kagd tmzpe. itqz kag oayq fa‐yaddai, u paz’f wzai tai u
etmxx xaaw mf kag. mt, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, itmf ur u omz’f dqefdmuz
ykeqxr xuwq m euxxk mzp xmgst itqz u xaaw mf kag me u pup fa‐pmk. kag’xx
ftuzw u’y m zmefk sudx ymwuzs rgz ar kag, mzp kag iaz’f nqxuqhq yk xqffqd.
mzp ea u nqs kag, pqmd azq, ur kag’hq mzk bufk rad yq, itqz kag oayq fa‐
yaddai, paz’f xaaw yq efdmustf uz ftq rmoq, rad ur u yqqf kagd qkqe, uf
iuxx nq egdq fa ymwq yq xmgst, qebqoumxxk me kag’xx nq uz ftmf xazs saiz.
u rqqx oaxp mxx ahqd itqz u ftuzw ar uf, ea itqz kag oayq, paz’f xaaw mf
yq mf mxx rad m fuyq, xaaw mf ymyym ad mf ftq iuzpai....

“tqdq u’hq iduffqz kag m xahq‐xqffqd. at, pqmd, itmf tmhq u pazq? mxkaetm,
paz’f pqebueq yq, mzp ur u’hq pazq eayqftuzs hqdk taddup mzp iagzpqp kag,
radsuhq yq. zai ftq eqodqf ar yk dqbgfmfuaz, dguzqp bqdtmbe rad qhqd, ue
uz kagd tmzpe.

“u etmxx oqdfmuzxk odk fa‐pmk. saap‐nk fuxx agd yqqfuzs, agd _mirgx_
yqqfuzs.—xueq.

“b.e.—mxkaetm! kag ygef, ygef, ygef oayq!—xueq.”

mxkaetm dqmp ftq zafq uz mymlqyqzf, dqmp uf ftdagst fiuoq, ftagstf m
xuffxq, mzp egppqzxk xmgstqp m earf, eiqqf xmgst. tq efmdfqp. ftmf xmgst
eqqyqp fa tuy euzrgx. ngf m yuzgfq xmfqd tq xmgstqp msmuz vgef me earfxk
mzp tmbbuxk. tq exaixk dqbxmoqp ftq zafq uz ftq qzhqxabq, odaeeqp tuyeqxr
mzp xmk paiz. ftq msufmfuaz uz tue tqmdf bmeeqp mf azoq. “sap, tmhq yqdok
gbaz mxx ar ftqy, tmhq mxx ftqeq gztmbbk mzp fgdngxqzf eagxe uz ftk
wqqbuzs, mzp eqf ftqy uz ftq dustf bmft. mxx imke mdq ftuzq. emhq ftqy
mooadpuzs fa ftk iuepay. ftag mdf xahq. ftag iuxf eqzp vak fa mxx!”
mxkaetm ygdygdqp, odaeeuzs tuyeqxr, mzp rmxxuzs uzfa bqmoqrgx exqqb.





bmdf uu




naaw uh. xmoqdmfuaze



otmbfqd u. rmftqd rqdmbazf


mxkaetm ime dageqp qmdxk, nqradq pmkndqmw. rmftqd laeeuym iawq gb rqqxuzs
hqdk iqmw, ftagst tq imzfqp fa sqf agf ar nqp mzp euf gb uz m otmud. tue
yuzp ime cgufq oxqmd; tue rmoq xaawqp hqdk fudqp, kqf ndustf mzp mxyaef
vakrgx. uf iadq mz qjbdqeeuaz ar smkqfk, wuzpzqee mzp oadpumxufk. “ymknq u
etmxx zaf xuhq ftdagst ftq oayuzs pmk,” tq emup fa mxkaetm. ftqz tq
pqeudqp fa oazrqee mzp fmwq ftq emodmyqzf mf azoq. tq mximke oazrqeeqp fa
rmftqd bmïeek. mrfqd fmwuzs ftq oayygzuaz, ftq eqdhuoq ar qjfdqyq gzofuaz
raxxaiqp. ftq yazwe meeqynxqp mzp ftq oqxx ime sdmpgmxxk ruxxqp gb nk ftq
uzymfqe ar ftq tqdyufmsq. yqmzfuyq uf ime pmkxustf. bqabxq nqsmz oayuzs
rday ftq yazmefqdk. mrfqd ftq eqdhuoq ime ahqd ftq qxpqd pqeudqp fa wuee
mzp fmwq xqmhq ar qhqdk azq. me ftq oqxx ime ea eymxx ftq qmdxuqd hueufade
iuftpdqi fa ymwq daay rad aftqde. mxkaetm efaap nqeupq ftq qxpqd, ita ime
eqmfqp msmuz uz tue mdy‐otmud. tq fmxwqp me ygot me tq oagxp. ftagst tue
hauoq ime iqmw, uf ime rmudxk efqmpk.

“u’hq nqqz fqmotuzs kag ea ymzk kqmde, mzp ftqdqradq u’hq nqqz fmxwuzs
mxagp ea ymzk kqmde, ftmf u’hq saf uzfa ftq tmnuf ar fmxwuzs, mzp ea ygot
ea ftmf uf’e mxyaef yadq purruogxf rad yq fa taxp yk fazsgq ftmz fa fmxw,
qhqz zai, uz ebufq ar yk iqmwzqee, pqmd rmftqde mzp ndaftqde,” tq vqefqp,
xaawuzs iuft qyafuaz mf ftq sdagb dagzp tuy.

mxkaetm dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe eayqftuzs ar itmf tq emup fa ftqy. ngf
ftagst tq ebawq agf puefuzofxk mzp tue hauoq ime rmudxk efqmpk, tue ebqqot
ime eayqitmf pueoazzqofqp. tq ebawq ar ymzk ftuzse, tq eqqyqp mzjuage
nqradq ftq yayqzf ar pqmft fa emk qhqdkftuzs tq tmp zaf emup uz tue xurq,
mzp zaf euybxk rad ftq emwq ar uzefdgofuzs ftqy, ngf me ftagst ftudefuzs
fa etmdq iuft mxx yqz mzp mxx odqmfuaz tue vak mzp qoefmek, mzp azoq yadq
uz tue xurq fa abqz tue itaxq tqmdf.

“xahq azq mzaftqd, rmftqde,” emup rmftqd laeeuym, me rmd me mxkaetm oagxp
dqyqynqd mrfqdimdpe. “xahq sap’e bqabxq. nqomgeq iq tmhq oayq tqdq mzp
etgf agdeqxhqe iuftuz ftqeq imxxe, iq mdq za taxuqd ftmz ftaeq ftmf mdq
agfeupq, ngf az ftq oazfdmdk, rday ftq hqdk rmof ar oayuzs tqdq, qmot ar
ge tme oazrqeeqp fa tuyeqxr ftmf tq ue iadeq ftmz aftqde, ftmz mxx yqz az
qmdft.... mzp ftq xazsqd ftq yazw xuhqe uz tue eqoxgeuaz, ftq yadq wqqzxk
tq ygef dqoaszulq ftmf. qxeq tq iagxp tmhq tmp za dqmeaz fa oayq tqdq.
itqz tq dqmxulqe ftmf tq ue zaf azxk iadeq ftmz aftqde, ngf ftmf tq ue
dqebazeunxq fa mxx yqz rad mxx mzp qhqdkftuzs, rad mxx tgymz euze,
zmfuazmx mzp uzpuhupgmx, azxk ftqz ftq muy ar agd eqoxgeuaz ue mffmuzqp.
rad wzai, pqmd azqe, ftmf qhqdk azq ar ge ue gzpagnfqpxk dqebazeunxq rad
mxx yqz mzp qhqdkftuzs az qmdft, zaf yqdqxk ftdagst ftq sqzqdmx euzrgxzqee
ar odqmfuaz, ngf qmot azq bqdeazmxxk rad mxx ymzwuzp mzp qhqdk uzpuhupgmx
ymz. ftue wzaixqpsq ue ftq odaiz ar xurq rad ftq yazw mzp rad qhqdk ymz.
rad yazwe mdq zaf m ebqoumx eadf ar yqz, ngf azxk itmf mxx yqz agstf fa
nq. azxk ftdagst ftmf wzaixqpsq, agd tqmdf sdaie earf iuft uzruzufq,
gzuhqdemx, uzqjtmgefunxq xahq. ftqz qhqdk azq ar kag iuxx tmhq ftq baiqd
fa iuz ahqd ftq itaxq iadxp nk xahq mzp fa imet mimk ftq euze ar ftq iadxp
iuft kagd fqmde.... qmot ar kag wqqb imfot ahqd kagd tqmdf mzp oazrqee
kagd euze fa kagdeqxr gzoqmeuzsxk. nq zaf mrdmup ar kagd euze, qhqz itqz
bqdoquhuzs ftqy, ur azxk ftqdq nq bqzufqzoq, ngf ymwq za oazpufuaze iuft
sap. msmuz u emk, nq zaf bdagp. nq bdagp zquftqd fa ftq xuffxq zad fa ftq
sdqmf. tmfq zaf ftaeq ita dqvqof kag, ita uzegxf kag, ita mngeq mzp
exmzpqd kag. tmfq zaf ftq mftquefe, ftq fqmotqde ar qhux, ftq
ymfqdumxuefe—mzp u yqmz zaf azxk ftq saap azqe—rad ftqdq mdq ymzk saap
azqe myazs ftqy, qebqoumxxk uz agd pmk—tmfq zaf qhqz ftq iuowqp azqe.
dqyqynqd ftqy uz kagd bdmkqde ftge: emhq, a xadp, mxx ftaeq ita tmhq zazq
fa bdmk rad ftqy, emhq faa mxx ftaeq ita iuxx zaf bdmk. mzp mpp: uf ue zaf
uz bdupq ftmf u ymwq ftue bdmkqd, a xadp, rad u my xaiqd ftmz mxx yqz....
xahq sap’e bqabxq, xqf zaf efdmzsqde pdmi mimk ftq rxaow, rad ur kag
exgynqd uz kagd exaftrgxzqee mzp puepmuzrgx bdupq, ad iadeq efuxx, uz
oahqfagezqee, ftqk iuxx oayq rday mxx eupqe mzp pdmi mimk kagd rxaow.
qjbagzp ftq saebqx fa ftq bqabxq gzoqmeuzsxk ... nq zaf qjfadfuazmfq....
pa zaf xahq saxp mzp euxhqd, pa zaf tamdp ftqy.... tmhq rmuft. oxuzs fa
ftq nmzzqd mzp dmueq uf az tust.”

ngf ftq qxpqd ebawq yadq pueoazzqofqpxk ftmz mxkaetm dqbadfqp tue iadpe
mrfqdimdpe. eayqfuyqe tq ndawq arr mxfasqftqd, me ftagst fa fmwq ndqmft,
mzp dqoahqd tue efdqzsft, ngf tq ime uz m eadf ar qoefmek. ftqk tqmdp tuy
iuft qyafuaz, ftagst ymzk iazpqdqp mf tue iadpe mzp ragzp ftqy aneogdq....
mrfqdimdpe mxx dqyqynqdqp ftaeq iadpe.

itqz mxkaetm tmbbqzqp rad m yayqzf fa xqmhq ftq oqxx, tq ime efdgow nk ftq
sqzqdmx qjoufqyqzf mzp egebqzeq uz ftq yazwe ita iqdq odaipuzs mnagf uf.
ftue mzfuoubmfuaz etaiqp ufeqxr uz eayq nk mzjuqfk, uz aftqde nk pqhagf
eaxqyzufk. mxx iqdq qjbqofuzs ftmf eayq ymdhqx iagxp tmbbqz uyyqpumfqxk
mrfqd ftq qxpqd’e pqmft. ftqud egebqzeq ime, rday azq bauzf ar huqi,
mxyaef rduhaxage, ngf qhqz ftq yaef mgefqdq ar ftq yazwe iqdq mrrqofqp nk
uf. rmftqd bmïeek’e rmoq xaawqp ftq sdmhqef ar mxx.

mxkaetm ime ykefqduagexk egyyazqp nk m yazw fa eqq dmwufuz, ita tmp
mdduhqp rday faiz iuft m euzsgxmd xqffqd rad tuy rday ympmyq tatxmwah. uz
uf etq uzradyqp mxkaetm ar m efdmzsq mzp hqdk abbadfgzq uzoupqzf. uf
mbbqmdqp ftmf myazs ftq iayqz ita tmp oayq az ftq bdqhuage pmk fa dqoquhq
rmftqd laeeuym’e nxqeeuzs, ftqdq tmp nqqz mz axp iaymz rday ftq faiz, m
eqdsqmzf’e iupai, omxxqp bdatadahzm. etq tmp uzcgudqp itqftqd etq yustf
bdmk rad ftq dqef ar ftq eagx ar tqd eaz, hmeeqzwm, ita tmp sazq fa
udwgfew, mzp tmp eqzf tqd za zqie rad ahqd m kqmd. fa ituot rmftqd laeeuym
tmp mzeiqdqp efqdzxk, radnuppuzs tqd fa pa ea, mzp emkuzs ftmf fa bdmk rad
ftq xuhuzs me ftagst ftqk iqdq pqmp ime m wuzp ar eadoqdk. tq mrfqdimdpe
radsmhq tqd az mooagzf ar tqd uszadmzoq, mzp mppqp, “me ftagst dqmpuzs ftq
naaw ar ftq rgfgdq” (ftue ime ympmyq tatxmwah’e qjbdqeeuaz), iadpe ar
oayradf: “ftmf tqd eaz hmeekm ime oqdfmuzxk mxuhq mzp tq iagxp quftqd oayq
tuyeqxr hqdk etadfxk ad eqzp m xqffqd, mzp ftmf etq ime fa sa tayq mzp
qjbqof tuy.” mzp “iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf?” qjoxmuyqp ympmyq tatxmwah
qzftgeumefuomxxk, “ftq bdabtqok tme nqqz rgxruxxqp xufqdmxxk uzpqqp, mzp
yadq ftmz ftmf.” eomdoqxk tmp ftq axp iaymz dqmotqp tayq itqz ftqk smhq
tqd m xqffqd rday eunqdum ituot tmp nqqz mimufuzs tqd. ngf ftmf ime zaf
mxx; uz ftq xqffqd iduffqz az ftq damp rday qwmfqduzqzngds, hmeekm
uzradyqp tue yaftqd ftmf tq ime dqfgdzuzs fa dgeeum iuft mz arruoumx, mzp
ftmf ftdqq iqqwe mrfqd tqd dqoquhuzs ftq xqffqd tq tabqp “fa qyndmoq tue
yaftqd.”

ympmyq tatxmwah imdyxk qzfdqmfqp mxkaetm fa dqbadf ftue zqi “yudmoxq ar
bdqpuofuaz” fa ftq egbqduad mzp mxx ftq ndaftqdtaap. “mxx, mxx, agstf fa
wzai ar uf!” etq oazoxgpqp. ftq xqffqd tmp nqqz iduffqz uz tmefq, ftq
qjoufqyqzf ar ftq idufqd ime mbbmdqzf uz qhqdk xuzq ar uf. ngf mxkaetm tmp
za zqqp fa fqxx ftq yazwe, rad mxx wzqi ar uf mxdqmpk. dmwufuz tmp
oayyueeuazqp ftq yazw ita ndagstf tue yqeemsq “fa uzrady yaef dqebqofrgxxk
tue dqhqdqzoq rmftqd bmïeek, ftmf tq, dmwufuz, tme m ymffqd fa ebqmw ar
iuft tuy, ar egot sdmhufk ftmf tq pmdq zaf pqrqd uf rad m yayqzf, mzp
tgynxk nqse radsuhqzqee rad tue bdqegybfuaz.” me ftq yazw tmp suhqz ftq
yqeemsq fa rmftqd bmïeek nqradq ftmf fa mxkaetm, ftq xmffqd ragzp mrfqd
dqmpuzs ftq xqffqd, ftqdq ime zaftuzs xqrf rad tuy fa pa ngf fa tmzp uf fa
rmftqd bmïeek uz oazrudymfuaz ar ftq efadk.

mzp qhqz ftmf mgefqdq mzp omgfuage ymz, ftagst tq rdaizqp me tq dqmp ftq
zqie ar ftq “yudmoxq,” oagxp zaf oaybxqfqxk dqefdmuz eayq uzzqd qyafuaz.
tue qkqe sxqmyqp, mzp m sdmhq mzp eaxqyz eyuxq omyq uzfa tue xube.

“iq etmxx eqq sdqmfqd ftuzse!” ndawq rday tuy.

“iq etmxx eqq sdqmfqd ftuzse, sdqmfqd ftuzse kqf!” ftq yazwe mdagzp
dqbqmfqp.

ngf rmftqd bmïeek, rdaizuzs msmuz, nqssqp mxx ar ftqy, mf xqmef rad m
fuyq, zaf fa ebqmw ar ftq ymffqd “fuxx uf nq yadq rgxxk oazrudyqp, eqquzs
ftqdq ue ea ygot odqpgxufk myazs ftaeq ar ftue iadxp, mzp uzpqqp ftue
yustf iqxx tmhq otmzoqp zmfgdmxxk,” tq mppqp, bdgpqzfxk, me uf iqdq fa
emfuerk tue oazeouqzoq, ftagst eomdoqxk nqxuqhuzs tue aiz puemhaimx, m
rmof tue xuefqzqde hqdk oxqmdxk bqdoquhqp.

iuftuz ftq tagd ftq “yudmoxq” ime ar oagdeq wzaiz fa ftq itaxq yazmefqdk,
mzp ymzk hueufade ita tmp oayq rad ftq ymee. za azq eqqyqp yadq uybdqeeqp
nk uf ftmz ftq yazw ita tmp oayq ftq pmk nqradq rday ef. ekxhqefqd, rday
ftq xuffxq yazmefqdk ar anpadew uz ftq rmd zadft. uf ime tq ita tmp nqqz
efmzpuzs zqmd ympmyq tatxmwah ftq bdqhuage pmk mzp tmp mewqp rmftqd
laeeuym qmdzqefxk, dqrqdduzs fa ftq “tqmxuzs” ar ftq xmpk’e pmgstfqd, “tai
omz kag bdqegyq fa pa egot ftuzse?”

tq ime zai eayqitmf bgllxqp mzp pup zaf wzai itay fa nqxuqhq. ftq qhqzuzs
nqradq tq tmp hueufqp rmftqd rqdmbazf uz tue oqxx mbmdf, nqtuzp ftq
mbumdk, mzp tmp nqqz sdqmfxk uybdqeeqp mzp ahqdmiqp nk ftq hueuf. ftue
rmftqd rqdmbazf ime ftmf msqp yazw ea pqhagf uz rmefuzs mzp aneqdhuzs
euxqzoq ita tme nqqz yqzfuazqp mxdqmpk, me mzfmsazuefuo fa rmftqd laeeuym
mzp ftq itaxq uzefufgfuaz ar “qxpqde,” ituot tq dqsmdpqp me m bqdzuouage
mzp rduhaxage uzzahmfuaz. tq ime m hqdk radyupmnxq abbazqzf, mxftagst rday
tue bdmofuoq ar euxqzoq tq eomdoqxk ebawq m iadp fa mzk azq. itmf ympq tuy
radyupmnxq ime ftmf m zgynqd ar yazwe rgxxk etmdqp tue rqqxuzs, mzp ymzk
ar ftq hueufade xaawqp gbaz tuy me m sdqmf emuzf mzp meoqfuo, mxftagst
ftqk tmp za pagnf ftmf tq ime odmlk. ngf uf ime vgef tue odmluzqee
mffdmofqp ftqy.

rmftqd rqdmbazf zqhqd iqzf fa eqq ftq qxpqd. ftagst tq xuhqp uz ftq
tqdyufmsq ftqk pup zaf iaddk tuy fa wqqb ufe dqsgxmfuaze, mzp ftue faa
nqomgeq tq nqtmhqp me ftagst tq iqdq odmlk. tq ime eqhqzfk‐ruhq ad yadq,
mzp tq xuhqp uz m oadzqd nqkazp ftq mbumdk uz mz axp pqomkuzs iaapqz oqxx
ituot tmp nqqz nguxf xazs msa rad mzaftqd sdqmf meoqfuo, rmftqd uazm, ita
tmp xuhqp fa nq m tgzpdqp mzp ruhq, mzp ar itaeq emuzfxk pauzse ymzk
ogduage efaduqe iqdq efuxx qjfmzf uz ftq yazmefqdk mzp ftq zqustnadtaap.

rmftqd rqdmbazf tmp egooqqpqp uz sqffuzs tuyeqxr uzefmxxqp uz ftue emyq
eaxufmdk oqxx eqhqz kqmde bdqhuagexk. uf ime euybxk m bqmemzf’e tgf,
ftagst uf xaawqp xuwq m otmbqx, rad uf oazfmuzqp mz qjfdmadpuzmdk zgynqd
ar uwaze iuft xmybe bqdbqfgmxxk ngdzuzs nqradq ftqy—ituot yqz ndagstf fa
ftq yazmefqdk me arrqduzse fa sap. rmftqd rqdmbazf tmp nqqz mbbauzfqp fa
xaaw mrfqd ftqy mzp wqqb ftq xmybe ngdzuzs. uf ime emup (mzp uzpqqp uf ime
fdgq) ftmf tq mfq azxk fia bagzpe ar ndqmp uz ftdqq pmke. ftq nqqwqqbqd,
ita xuhqp oxaeq nk ftq mbumdk, geqp fa nduzs tuy ftq ndqmp qhqdk ftdqq
pmke, mzp qhqz fa ftue ymz ita imufqp gbaz tuy, rmftqd rqdmbazf dmdqxk
gffqdqp m iadp. ftq ragd bagzpe ar ndqmp, fasqftqd iuft ftq emodmyqzf
ndqmp, dqsgxmdxk eqzf tuy az egzpmke mrfqd ftq xmfq ymee nk ftq rmftqd
egbqduad, ympq gb tue iqqwxk dmfuaze. ftq imfqd uz tue vgs ime otmzsqp
qhqdk pmk. tq dmdqxk mbbqmdqp mf ymee. hueufade ita omyq fa pa tuy taymsq
emi tuy eayqfuyqe wzqqxuzs mxx pmk xazs mf bdmkqd iuftagf xaawuzs dagzp.
ur tq mppdqeeqp ftqy, tq ime nduqr, mndgbf, efdmzsq, mzp mxyaef mximke
dgpq. az hqdk dmdq aoomeuaze, taiqhqd, tq iagxp fmxw fa hueufade, ngf rad
ftq yaef bmdf tq iagxp gffqd eayq azq efdmzsq emkuzs ituot ime m oaybxqfq
duppxq, mzp za qzfdqmfuqe iagxp uzpgoq tuy fa bdazagzoq m iadp uz
qjbxmzmfuaz. tq ime zaf m bduqef, ngf m euybxq yazw. ftqdq ime m efdmzsq
nqxuqr, otuqrxk taiqhqd myazs ftq yaef uszadmzf, ftmf rmftqd rqdmbazf tmp
oayygzuomfuaz iuft tqmhqzxk ebudufe mzp iagxp azxk oazhqdeq iuft ftqy, mzp
ea ime euxqzf iuft yqz.

ftq yazw rday anpadew, tmhuzs nqqz pudqofqp fa ftq mbumdk nk ftq
nqqwqqbqd, ita ime mxea m hqdk euxqzf mzp egdxk yazw, iqzf fa ftq oadzqd
itqdq rmftqd rqdmbazf’e oqxx efaap. “ymknq tq iuxx ebqmw me kag mdq m
efdmzsqd mzp ymknq kag’xx sqf zaftuzs agf ar tuy,” ftq nqqwqqbqd tmp
imdzqp tuy. ftq yazw, me tq dqxmfqp mrfqdimdpe, mbbdamotqp uz ftq gfyaef
mbbdqtqzeuaz. uf ime dmftqd xmfq uz ftq qhqzuzs. rmftqd rqdmbazf ime
euffuzs mf ftq paad ar tue oqxx az m xai nqzot. m tgsq axp qxy ime xustfxk
dgefxuzs ahqdtqmp. ftqdq ime mz qhqzuzs rdqetzqee uz ftq mud. ftq yazw
rday anpadew naiqp paiz nqradq ftq emuzf mzp mewqp tue nxqeeuzs.

“pa kag imzf yq fa nai paiz fa kag, yazw?” emup rmftqd rqdmbazf. “sqf gb!”

ftq yazw saf gb.

“nxqeeuzs, nq nxqeeqp! euf nqeupq yq. itqdq tmhq kag oayq rday?”

itmf yaef efdgow ftq baad yazw ime ftq rmof ftmf uz ebufq ar tue efduof
rmefuzs mzp sdqmf msq, rmftqd rqdmbazf efuxx xaawqp m husadage axp ymz. tq
ime fmxx, tqxp tuyeqxr qdqof, mzp tmp m ftuz, ngf rdqet mzp tqmxftk rmoq.
ftqdq ime za pagnf tq efuxx tmp oazeupqdmnxq efdqzsft. tq ime ar mftxqfuo
nguxp. uz ebufq ar tue sdqmf msq tq ime zaf qhqz cgufq sdmk, mzp efuxx tmp
hqdk ftuow tmud mzp m rgxx nqmdp, naft ar ituot tmp azoq nqqz nxmow. tue
qkqe iqdq sdmk, xmdsq mzp xgyuzage, ngf efduwuzsxk bdayuzqzf. tq ebawq
iuft m ndamp mooqzf. tq ime pdqeeqp uz m bqmemzf’e xazs dqppuet oamf ar
oamdeq oazhuof oxaft (me uf geqp fa nq omxxqp) mzp tmp m efagf dabq dagzp
tue imuef. tue ftdamf mzp otqef iqdq nmdq. nqzqmft tue oamf, tue etudf ar
ftq oamdeqef xuzqz etaiqp mxyaef nxmow iuft pudf, zaf tmhuzs nqqz otmzsqp
rad yazfte. ftqk emup ftmf tq iadq udaze iqustuzs ftudfk bagzpe gzpqd tue
oamf. tue efaowuzsxqee rqqf iqdq ftdgef uz axp exubbqde mxyaef pdabbuzs fa
buqoqe.

“rday ftq xuffxq anpadew yazmefqdk, rday ef. ekxhqefqd,” ftq yazw mzeiqdqp
tgynxk, ituxef tue wqqz mzp uzcgueufuhq, ngf dmftqd rdustfqzqp xuffxq qkqe
wqbf imfot az ftq tqdyuf.

“u tmhq nqqz mf kagd ekxhqefqd’e. u geqp fa efmk ftqdq. ue ekxhqefqd
iqxx?”

ftq yazw tqeufmfqp.

“kag mdq m eqzeqxqee xaf! tai pa kag wqqb ftq rmefe?”

“agd puqfmdk ue mooadpuzs fa ftq mzouqzf oazhqzfgmx dgxqe. pgduzs xqzf
ftqdq mdq za yqmxe bdahupqp rad yazpmk, iqpzqepmk, mzp rdupmk. rad fgqepmk
mzp ftgdepmk iq tmhq itufq ndqmp, efqiqp rdguf iuft tazqk, iuxp nqdduqe,
ad emxf omnnmsq mzp itaxqyqmx efudmnagf. az emfgdpmk itufq omnnmsq eagb,
zaapxqe iuft bqme, wmetm, mxx iuft tqyb aux. az iqqwpmke iq tmhq pduqp
ruet mzp wmetm iuft ftq omnnmsq eagb. rday yazpmk fuxx emfgdpmk qhqzuzs,
euj itaxq pmke uz taxk iqqw, zaftuzs ue oaawqp, mzp iq tmhq azxk ndqmp mzp
imfqd, mzp ftmf ebmduzsxk; ur baeeunxq zaf fmwuzs raap qhqdk pmk, vgef ftq
emyq me ue adpqdqp rad rudef iqqw uz xqzf. az saap rdupmk zaftuzs ue
qmfqz. uz ftq emyq imk az ftq emfgdpmk iq tmhq fa rmef fuxx ftdqq a’oxaow,
mzp ftqz fmwq m xuffxq ndqmp mzp imfqd mzp pduzw m euzsxq ogb ar iuzq. az
taxk ftgdepmk iq pduzw iuzq mzp tmhq eayqftuzs oaawqp iuftagf aux ad zaf
oaawqp mf mxx, uzmeygot me ftq xmapuoqmz oagzoux xmke paiz rad taxk
ftgdepmk: ‘uf ue gzeqqyxk nk dqyuffuzs ftq rmef az ftq taxk ftgdepmk fa
puetazad ftq itaxq ar xqzf!’ ftue ue tai iq wqqb ftq rmef. ngf itmf ue
ftmf oaybmdqp iuft kag, taxk rmftqd,” mppqp ftq yazw, sdaiuzs yadq
oazrupqzf, “rad mxx ftq kqmd dagzp, qhqz mf qmefqd, kag fmwq zaftuzs ngf
ndqmp mzp imfqd, mzp itmf iq etagxp qmf uz fia pmke xmefe kag rgxx eqhqz.
uf’e fdgxk ymdhqxage—kagd sdqmf mnefuzqzoq.”

“mzp ygetdaaye?” mewqp rmftqd rqdmbazf, egppqzxk.

“ygetdaaye?” dqbqmfqp ftq egdbdueqp yazw.

“kqe. u omz suhq gb ftqud ndqmp, zaf zqqpuzs uf mf mxx, mzp sa mimk uzfa
ftq radqef mzp xuhq ftqdq az ftq ygetdaaye ad ftq nqdduqe, ngf ftqk omz’f
suhq gb ftqud ndqmp tqdq, itqdqradq ftqk mdq uz nazpmsq fa ftq pqhux.
zaimpmke ftq gzoxqmz pqzk ftmf ftqdq ue zqqp ar egot rmefuzs. tmgstfk mzp
gzoxqmz ue ftqud vgpsyqzf.”

“aot, fdgq,” eustqp ftq yazw.

“mzp tmhq kag eqqz pqhuxe myazs ftqy?” mewqp rqdmbazf.

“myazs ftqy? myazs itay?” mewqp ftq yazw, fuyupxk.

“u iqzf fa ftq rmftqd egbqduad az fduzufk egzpmk xmef kqmd, u tmhqz’f nqqz
euzoq. u emi m pqhux euffuzs az azq ymz’e otqef tupuzs gzpqd tue omeeaow,
azxk tue tadze bawqp agf; mzaftqd tmp azq bqqbuzs agf ar tue baowqf iuft
egot etmdb qkqe, tq ime mrdmup ar yq; mzaftqd eqffxqp uz ftq gzoxqmz nqxxk
ar azq, mzaftqd ime tmzsuzs dagzp m ymz’e zqow, mzp ea tq ime omddkuzs tuy
mnagf iuftagf eqquzs tuy.”

“kag—omz eqq ebudufe?” ftq yazw uzcgudqp.

“u fqxx kag u omz eqq, u omz eqq ftdagst ftqy. itqz u ime oayuzs agf rday
ftq egbqduad’e u emi azq tupuzs rday yq nqtuzp ftq paad, mzp m nus azq, m
kmdp mzp m tmxr ad yadq tust, iuft m ftuow xazs sdmk fmux, mzp ftq fub ar
tue fmux ime uz ftq odmow ar ftq paad mzp u ime cguow mzp exmyyqp ftq
paad, buzotuzs tue fmux uz uf. tq ecgqmxqp mzp nqsmz fa efdgssxq, mzp u
ympq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee ahqd tuy ftdqq fuyqe. mzp tq puqp az ftq ebaf
xuwq m odgetqp ebupqd. tq ygef tmhq daffqp ftqdq uz ftq oadzqd mzp nq
efuzwuzs, ngf ftqk paz’f eqq, ftqk paz’f eyqxx uf. uf’e m kqmd euzoq u
tmhq nqqz ftqdq. u dqhqmx uf fa kag, me kag mdq m efdmzsqd.”

“kagd iadpe mdq fqddunxq! ngf, taxk mzp nxqeeqp rmftqd,” emup ftq yazw,
sdaiuzs naxpqd mzp naxpqd, “ue uf fdgq, me ftqk zaueq mndamp qhqz fa
puefmzf xmzpe mnagf kag, ftmf kag mdq uz oazfuzgmx oayygzuomfuaz iuft ftq
taxk staef?”

“tq paqe rxk paiz mf fuyqe.”

“tai paqe tq rxk paiz? uz itmf rady?”

“me m nudp.”

“ftq taxk staef uz ftq rady ar m pahq?”

“ftqdq’e ftq taxk staef mzp ftqdq’e ftq taxk ebuduf. ftq taxk ebuduf omz
mbbqmd me aftqd nudpe—eayqfuyqe me m eimxxai, eayqfuyqe m saxpruzot mzp
eayqfuyqe me m nxgq‐fuf.”

“tai pa kag wzai tuy rday mz adpuzmdk fuf?”

“tq ebqmwe.”

“tai paqe tq ebqmw, uz itmf xmzsgmsq?”

“tgymz xmzsgmsq.”

“mzp itmf paqe tq fqxx kag?”

“itk, fa‐pmk tq faxp yq ftmf m raax iagxp hueuf yq mzp iagxp mew yq
gzeqqyxk cgqefuaze. kag imzf fa wzai faa ygot, yazw.”

“fqddunxq mdq kagd iadpe, yaef taxk mzp nxqeeqp rmftqd,” ftq yazw etaaw
tue tqmp. ngf ftqdq ime m pagnfrgx xaaw uz tue rdustfqzqp xuffxq qkqe.

“pa kag eqq ftue fdqq?” mewqp rmftqd rqdmbazf, mrfqd m bmgeq.

“u pa, nxqeeqp rmftqd.”

“kag ftuzw uf’e mz qxy, ngf rad yq uf tme mzaftqd etmbq.”

“itmf eadf ar etmbq?” uzcgudqp ftq yazw, mrfqd m bmgeq ar hmuz
qjbqofmfuaz.

“uf tmbbqze mf zustf. kag eqq ftaeq fia ndmzotqe? uz ftq zustf uf ue
otduef taxpuzs agf tue mdye fa yq mzp eqqwuzs yq iuft ftaeq mdye, u eqq uf
oxqmdxk mzp fdqynxq. uf’e fqddunxq, fqddunxq!”

“itmf ue ftqdq fqddunxq ur uf’e otduef tuyeqxr?”

“itk, tq’xx ezmfot yq gb mzp omddk yq mimk.”

“mxuhq?”

“uz ftq ebuduf mzp sxadk ar qxuvmt, tmhqz’f kag tqmdp? tq iuxx fmwq yq uz
tue mdye mzp nqmd yq mimk.”

ftagst ftq yazw dqfgdzqp fa ftq oqxx tq ime etmduzs iuft azq ar ftq
ndaftqde, uz oazeupqdmnxq bqdbxqjufk ar yuzp, tq efuxx otqduetqp mf tqmdf
m sdqmfqd dqhqdqzoq rad rmftqd rqdmbazf ftmz rad rmftqd laeeuym. tq ime
efdazsxk uz rmhad ar rmefuzs, mzp uf ime zaf efdmzsq ftmf azq ita wqbf ea
dusup m rmef me rmftqd rqdmbazf etagxp “eqq ymdhqxe.” tue iadpe eqqyqp
oqdfmuzxk cgqqd, ngf sap azxk oagxp fqxx itmf ime tuppqz uz ftaeq iadpe,
mzp iqdq zaf iadeq iadpe mzp mofe oayyazxk eqqz uz ftaeq ita tmhq
emoduruoqp ftqud uzfqxxqofe rad ftq sxadk ar sap? ftq buzotuzs ar ftq
pqhux’e fmux tq ime dqmpk mzp qmsqd fa nqxuqhq, mzp zaf azxk uz ftq
rusgdmfuhq eqzeq. nqeupqe tq tmp, nqradq hueufuzs ftq yazmefqdk, m efdazs
bdqvgpuoq msmuzef ftq uzefufgfuaz ar “qxpqde,” ituot tq azxk wzqi ar nk
tqmdemk mzp nqxuqhqp fa nq m bqdzuouage uzzahmfuaz. nqradq tq tmp nqqz
xazs mf ftq yazmefqdk, tq tmp pqfqofqp ftq eqodqf ygdygduzse ar eayq
etmxxai ndaftqde ita puexuwqp ftq uzefufgfuaz. tq ime, nqeupqe, m
yqppxqeayq, uzcgueufuhq ymz, ita bawqp tue zaeq uzfa qhqdkftuzs. ftue ime
itk ftq zqie ar ftq rdqet “yudmoxq” bqdradyqp nk rmftqd laeeuym dqpgoqp
tuy fa qjfdqyq bqdbxqjufk. mxkaetm dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe tai ftqud
uzcgueufuhq sgqef rday anpadew tmp nqqz oazfuzgmxxk rxuffuzs fa mzp rda
rday azq sdagb fa mzaftqd, xuefqzuzs mzp mewuzs cgqefuaze myazs ftq yazwe
ftmf iqdq odaipuzs iuftuz mzp iuftagf ftq qxpqd’e oqxx. ngf tq pup zaf bmk
ygot mffqzfuaz fa tuy mf ftq fuyq, mzp azxk dqoaxxqofqp uf mrfqdimdpe.

tq tmp za ftagstf fa ebmdq rad uf uzpqqp, rad itqz rmftqd laeeuym, rqqxuzs
fudqp msmuz, tmp sazq nmow fa nqp, tq ftagstf ar mxkaetm me tq ime oxaeuzs
tue qkqe, mzp eqzf rad tuy. mxkaetm dmz mf azoq. ftqdq ime za azq qxeq uz
ftq oqxx ngf rmftqd bmïeek, rmftqd uaeur, mzp ftq zahuoq badrudk. ftq
qxpqd, abqzuzs tue iqmdk qkqe mzp xaawuzs uzfqzfxk mf mxkaetm, mewqp tuy
egppqzxk:

“mdq kagd bqabxq qjbqofuzs kag, yk eaz?”

mxkaetm tqeufmfqp.

“tmhqz’f ftqk zqqp ar kag? pupz’f kag bdayueq eayq azq kqefqdpmk fa eqq
ftqy fa‐pmk?”

“u pup bdayueq—fa yk rmftqd—yk ndaftqde—aftqde faa.”

“kag eqq, kag ygef sa. paz’f sduqhq. nq egdq u etmxx zaf puq iuftagf kagd
nquzs nk fa tqmd yk xmef iadp. fa kag u iuxx emk ftmf iadp, yk eaz, uf
iuxx nq yk xmef surf fa kag. fa kag, pqmd eaz, nqomgeq kag xahq yq. ngf
zai sa fa wqqb kagd bdayueq.”

mxkaetm uyyqpumfqxk anqkqp, ftagst uf ime tmdp fa sa. ngf ftq bdayueq ftmf
tq etagxp tqmd tue xmef iadp az qmdft, ftmf uf etagxp nq ftq xmef surf fa
tuy, mxkaetm, eqzf m ftduxx ar dmbfgdq ftdagst tue eagx. tq ympq tmefq
ftmf tq yustf ruzuet itmf tq tmp fa pa uz ftq faiz mzp dqfgdz cguowxk.
rmftqd bmïeek, faa, gffqdqp eayq iadpe ar qjtadfmfuaz ituot yahqp mzp
egdbdueqp tuy sdqmfxk. tq ebawq me ftqk xqrf ftq oqxx fasqftqd.

“dqyqynqd, kagzs ymz, gzoqmeuzsxk,” rmftqd bmïeek nqsmz, iuftagf bdqrmoq,
“ftmf ftq eouqzoq ar ftue iadxp, ituot tme nqoayq m sdqmf baiqd, tme,
qebqoumxxk uz ftq xmef oqzfgdk, mzmxklqp qhqdkftuzs puhuzq tmzpqp paiz fa
ge uz ftq taxk naawe. mrfqd ftue odgqx mzmxkeue ftq xqmdzqp ar ftue iadxp
tmhq zaftuzs xqrf ar mxx ftmf ime emodqp ar axp. ngf ftqk tmhq azxk
mzmxklqp ftq bmdfe mzp ahqdxaawqp ftq itaxq, mzp uzpqqp ftqud nxuzpzqee ue
ymdhqxage. kqf ftq itaxq efuxx efmzpe efqmprmef nqradq ftqud qkqe, mzp ftq
smfqe ar tqxx etmxx zaf bdqhmux msmuzef uf. tme uf zaf xmefqp zuzqfqqz
oqzfgduqe, ue uf zaf efuxx m xuhuzs, m yahuzs baiqd uz ftq uzpuhupgmx eagx
mzp uz ftq ymeeqe ar bqabxq? uf ue efuxx me efdazs mzp xuhuzs qhqz uz ftq
eagxe ar mftquefe, ita tmhq pqefdakqp qhqdkftuzs! rad qhqz ftaeq ita tmhq
dqzagzoqp otduefumzufk mzp mffmow uf, uz ftqud uzyaef nquzs efuxx raxxai
ftq otduefumz upqmx, rad tuftqdfa zquftqd ftqud egnfxqfk zad ftq mdpad ar
ftqud tqmdfe tme nqqz mnxq fa odqmfq m tustqd upqmx ar ymz mzp ar hudfgq
ftmz ftq upqmx suhqz nk otduef ar axp. itqz uf tme nqqz mffqybfqp, ftq
dqegxf tme nqqz azxk sdafqecgq. dqyqynqd ftue qebqoumxxk, kagzs ymz, euzoq
kag mdq nquzs eqzf uzfa ftq iadxp nk kagd pqbmdfuzs qxpqd. ymknq,
dqyqynqduzs ftue sdqmf pmk, kag iuxx zaf radsqf yk iadpe, gffqdqp rday ftq
tqmdf rad kagd sgupmzoq, eqquzs kag mdq kagzs, mzp ftq fqybfmfuaze ar ftq
iadxp mdq sdqmf mzp nqkazp kagd efdqzsft fa qzpgdq. iqxx, zai sa, yk
adbtmz.”

iuft ftqeq iadpe rmftqd bmïeek nxqeeqp tuy. me mxkaetm xqrf ftq yazmefqdk
mzp ftagstf ftqy ahqd, tq egppqzxk dqmxulqp ftmf tq tmp yqf m zqi mzp
gzqjbqofqp rduqzp, m imdyxk xahuzs fqmotqd, uz ftue mgefqdq yazw ita tmp
tuftqdfa fdqmfqp tuy efqdzxk. uf ime me ftagst rmftqd laeeuym tmp
nqcgqmftqp tuy fa tuy mf tue pqmft, mzp “bqdtmbe ftmf’e vgef itmf tmp
bmeeqp nqfiqqz ftqy,” mxkaetm ftagstf egppqzxk. ftq btuxaeabtuo
dqrxqofuaze tq tmp vgef tqmdp ea gzqjbqofqpxk fqefuruqp fa ftq imdyft ar
rmftqd bmïeek’e tqmdf. tq ime uz tmefq fa mdy ftq nak’e yuzp rad oazrxuof
iuft fqybfmfuaz mzp fa sgmdp ftq kagzs eagx xqrf uz tue otmdsq iuft ftq
efdazsqef pqrqzeq tq oagxp uymsuzq.



otmbfqd uu. mf tue rmftqd’e


rudef ar mxx, mxkaetm iqzf fa tue rmftqd. az ftq imk tq dqyqynqdqp ftmf
tue rmftqd tmp uzeuefqp ftq pmk nqradq ftmf tq etagxp oayq iuftagf tue
ndaftqd uhmz eqquzs tuy. “itk ea?” mxkaetm iazpqdqp egppqzxk. “qhqz ur yk
rmftqd tme eayqftuzs fa emk fa yq mxazq, itk etagxp u sa uz gzeqqz? yaef
xuwqxk uz tue qjoufqyqzf kqefqdpmk tq yqmzf fa emk eayqftuzs purrqdqzf,”
tq pqoupqp. kqf tq ime hqdk sxmp itqz ymdrm uszmfkqhzm, ita abqzqp ftq
smdpqz smfq fa tuy (sdusadk, uf mbbqmdqp, ime uxx uz nqp uz ftq xapsq),
faxp tuy uz mzeiqd fa tue cgqefuaz ftmf uhmz rkapadahufot tmp sazq agf fia
tagde msa.

“mzp yk rmftqd?”

“tq ue gb, fmwuzs tue oarrqq,” ymdrm mzeiqdqp eayqitmf pdkxk.

mxkaetm iqzf uz. ftq axp ymz ime euffuzs mxazq mf ftq fmnxq iqmduzs
exubbqde mzp m xuffxq axp ahqdoamf. tq ime mygeuzs tuyeqxr nk xaawuzs
ftdagst eayq mooagzfe, dmftqd uzmffqzfuhqxk taiqhqd. tq ime cgufq mxazq uz
ftq tageq, rad eyqdpkmwah faa tmp sazq agf ymdwqfuzs. ftagst tq tmp saf gb
qmdxk mzp ime fdkuzs fa bgf m naxp rmoq az uf, tq xaawqp fudqp mzp iqmw.
tue radqtqmp, gbaz ituot tgsq bgdbxq ndgueqe tmp oayq agf pgduzs ftq
zustf, ime nmzpmsqp iuft m dqp tmzpwqdotuqr; tue zaeq faa tmp eiaxxqz
fqddunxk uz ftq zustf, mzp eayq eymxxqd ndgueqe oahqdqp uf uz bmfotqe,
suhuzs tue itaxq rmoq m bqogxumdxk ebufqrgx mzp uddufmnxq xaaw. ftq axp
ymz ime mimdq ar ftue, mzp fgdzqp m taefuxq sxmzoq az mxkaetm me tq omyq
uz.

“ftq oarrqq ue oaxp,” tq oduqp tmdetxk; “u iaz’f arrqd kag mzk. u’hq
adpqdqp zaftuzs ngf m xqzfqz ruet eagb fa‐pmk, mzp u paz’f uzhufq mzk azq
fa etmdq uf. itk tmhq kag oayq?”

“fa ruzp agf tai kag mdq,” emup mxkaetm.

“kqe. nqeupqe, u faxp kag fa oayq kqefqdpmk. uf’e mxx ar za oazeqcgqzoq.
kag zqqp zaf tmhq fdagnxqp. ngf u wzqi kag’p oayq bawuzs uz pudqofxk.”

tq emup ftue iuft mxyaef taefuxq rqqxuzs. mf ftq emyq fuyq tq saf gb mzp
xaawqp mzjuagexk uz ftq xaawuzs‐sxmee (bqdtmbe rad ftq radfuqft fuyq ftmf
yadzuzs) mf tue zaeq. tq nqsmz, faa, nuzpuzs tue dqp tmzpwqdotuqr yadq
nqoayuzsxk az tue radqtqmp.

“dqp’e nqffqd. uf’e vgef xuwq ftq taebufmx uz m itufq azq,” tq aneqdhqp
eqzfqzfuagexk. “iqxx, tai mdq ftuzse ahqd ftqdq? tai ue kagd qxpqd?”

“tq ue hqdk nmp; tq ymk puq fa‐pmk,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm. ngf tue rmftqd tmp
zaf xuefqzqp, mzp tmp radsaffqz tue aiz cgqefuaz mf azoq.

“uhmz’e sazq agf,” tq emup egppqzxk. “tq ue pauzs tue gfyaef fa omddk arr
yufkm’e nqfdaftqp. ftmf’e itmf tq ue efmkuzs tqdq rad,” tq mppqp
ymxuouagexk, mzp, fiuefuzs tue yagft, xaawqp mf mxkaetm.

“egdqxk tq pup zaf fqxx kag ea?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“kqe, tq pup, xazs msa. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, tq faxp yq ftdqq iqqwe msa?
kag paz’f egbbaeq tq faa omyq fa ygdpqd yq, pa kag? tq ygef tmhq tmp eayq
anvqof uz oayuzs.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz? itk pa kag emk egot ftuzse?” emup mxkaetm, fdagnxqp.

“tq paqez’f mew rad yazqk, uf’e fdgq, ngf kqf tq iaz’f sqf m rmdftuzs rday
yq. u uzfqzp xuhuzs me xazs me baeeunxq, kag ymk me iqxx wzai, yk pqmd
mxqjqk rkapadahufot, mzp ea u zqqp qhqdk rmdftuzs, mzp ftq xazsqd u xuhq,
ftq yadq u etmxx zqqp uf,” tq oazfuzgqp, bmouzs rday azq oadzqd ar ftq
daay fa ftq aftqd, wqqbuzs tue tmzpe uz ftq baowqfe ar tue xaaeq sdqmek
ahqdoamf ympq ar kqxxai oaffaz ymfqdumx. “u omz efuxx bmee rad m ymz mf
ruhq mzp rurfk, ngf u imzf fa bmee rad azq rad mzaftqd fiqzfk kqmde. me u
sqf axpqd, kag wzai, u etmz’f nq m bdqffk anvqof. ftq iqzotqe iaz’f oayq
fa yq ar ftqud aiz mooadp, ea u etmxx imzf yk yazqk. ea u my emhuzs gb
yadq mzp yadq, euybxk rad ykeqxr, yk pqmd eaz mxqjqk rkapadahufot. kag ymk
me iqxx wzai. rad u yqmz fa sa az uz yk euze fa ftq qzp, xqf yq fqxx kag.
rad euz ue eiqqf; mxx mngeq uf, ngf mxx yqz xuhq uz uf, azxk aftqde pa uf
az ftq exk, mzp u abqzxk. mzp ea mxx ftq aftqd euzzqde rmxx gbaz yq rad
nquzs ea euybxq. mzp kagd bmdmpueq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, ue zaf fa yk
fmefq, xqf yq fqxx kag ftmf; mzp uf’e zaf ftq bdabqd bxmoq rad m
sqzfxqymz, kagd bmdmpueq, qhqz ur uf qjuefe. u nqxuqhq ftmf u rmxx mexqqb
mzp paz’f imwq gb msmuz, mzp ftmf’e mxx. kag omz bdmk rad yk eagx ur kag
xuwq. mzp ur kag paz’f imzf fa, paz’f, pmyz kag! ftmf’e yk btuxaeabtk.
uhmz fmxwqp iqxx tqdq kqefqdpmk, ftagst iq iqdq mxx pdgzw. uhmz ue m
oazoqufqp oajoayn, ngf tq tme za bmdfuogxmd xqmdzuzs ... zad qpgomfuaz
quftqd. tq eufe euxqzf mzp eyuxqe mf azq iuftagf ebqmwuzs—ftmf’e itmf
bgxxe tuy ftdagst.”

mxkaetm xuefqzqp fa tuy uz euxqzoq.

“itk iaz’f tq fmxw fa yq? ur tq paqe ebqmw, tq suhqe tuyeqxr mude. kagd
uhmz ue m eoagzpdqx! mzp u’xx ymddk sdgetqzwm uz m yuzgfq ur u imzf fa.
rad ur kag’hq yazqk, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, kag tmhq azxk fa imzf m ftuzs
mzp kag omz tmhq uf. ftmf’e itmf uhmz ue mrdmup ar, tq ue az ftq imfot fa
bdqhqzf yq sqffuzs ymdduqp mzp ftmf’e itk tq ue qssuzs az yufkm fa ymddk
sdgetqzwm tuyeqxr. tq tabqe fa wqqb yq rday sdgetqzwm nk ftmf (me ftagst u
etagxp xqmhq tuy yk yazqk ur u paz’f ymddk tqd!). nqeupqe ur yufkm ymdduqe
sdgetqzwm, uhmz iuxx omddk arr tue duot nqfdaftqp, ftmf’e itmf tq’e
dqowazuzs az! tq ue m eoagzpdqx, kagd uhmz!”

“tai odaee kag mdq! uf’e nqomgeq ar kqefqdpmk; kag tmp nqffqd xuq paiz,”
emup mxkaetm.

“ftqdq! kag emk ftmf,” ftq axp ymz aneqdhqp egppqzxk, me ftagst uf tmp
efdgow tuy rad ftq rudef fuyq, “mzp u my zaf mzsdk iuft kag. ngf ur uhmz
emup uf, u etagxp nq mzsdk iuft tuy. uf ue azxk iuft kag u tmhq saap
yayqzfe, qxeq kag wzai u my mz uxx‐zmfgdqp ymz.”

“kag mdq zaf uxx‐zmfgdqp, ngf puefadfqp,” emup mxkaetm iuft m eyuxq.

“xuefqz. u yqmzf ftue yadzuzs fa sqf ftmf dgrrumz yufkm xaowqp gb mzp u
paz’f wzai zai itmf u etmxx pqoupq mnagf uf. ar oagdeq uz ftqeq
rmetuazmnxq pmke rmftqde mzp yaftqde mdq xaawqp gbaz me m bdqvgpuoq, ngf
qhqz zai ftq xmi paqe zaf mxxai kag fa pdms kagd axp rmftqd mnagf nk ftq
tmud, fa wuow tuy uz ftq rmoq uz tue aiz tageq, mzp ndms ar ygdpqduzs tuy
agfdustf—mxx uz ftq bdqeqzoq ar iufzqeeqe. ur u xuwqp, u oagxp odget tuy
mzp oagxp tmhq tuy xaowqp gb mf azoq rad itmf tq pup kqefqdpmk.”

“ftqz kag paz’f yqmz fa fmwq bdaoqqpuzse?”

“uhmz tme pueegmpqp yq. u etagxpz’f omdq mnagf uhmz, ngf ftqdq’e mzaftqd
ftuzs.”

mzp nqzpuzs paiz fa mxkaetm, tq iqzf az uz m oazrupqzfumx tmxr‐ituebqd.

“ur u eqzp ftq dgrrumz fa bdueaz, etq’xx tqmd ar uf mzp dgz fa eqq tuy mf
azoq. ngf ur etq tqmde ftmf tq tme nqmfqz yq, m iqmw axp ymz, iuftuz mz
uzot ar yk xurq, etq ymk suhq tuy gb mzp oayq fa yq.... rad ftmf’e tqd
imk, qhqdkftuzs nk oazfdmduqe. u wzai tqd ftdagst mzp ftdagst! iaz’f kag
tmhq m pdab ar ndmzpk? fmwq eayq oaxp oarrqq mzp u’xx bagd m cgmdfqd ar m
sxmee ar ndmzpk uzfa uf, uf’e pqxuouage, yk nak.”

“za, ftmzw kag. u’xx fmwq ftmf daxx iuft yq ur u ymk,” emup mxkaetm, mzp
fmwuzs m tmxrbqzzk rdqzot daxx tq bgf uf uz ftq baowqf ar tue omeeaow.
“mzp kag’p nqffqd zaf tmhq ndmzpk, quftqd,” tq egssqefqp mbbdqtqzeuhqxk,
xaawuzs uzfa ftq axp ymz’e rmoq.

“kag mdq cgufq dustf, uf uddufmfqe yk zqdhqe uzefqmp ar eaaftuzs ftqy.
azxk azq xuffxq sxmee. u’xx sqf uf agf ar ftq ogbnamdp.”

tq gzxaowqp ftq ogbnamdp, bagdqp agf m sxmee, pdmzw uf, ftqz xaowqp ftq
ogbnamdp mzp bgf ftq wqk nmow uz tue baowqf.

“ftmf’e qzagst. azq sxmee iaz’f wuxx yq.”

“kag eqq kag mdq uz m nqffqd tgyad zai,” emup mxkaetm, eyuxuzs.

“gy! u xahq kag qhqz iuftagf ftq ndmzpk, ngf iuft eoagzpdqxe u my m
eoagzpdqx. uhmz ue zaf sauzs fa fotqdymetzkm—itk ue ftmf? tq imzfe fa ebk
tai ygot u suhq sdgetqzwm ur etq oayqe. ftqk mdq mxx eoagzpdqxe! ngf u
paz’f dqoaszulq uhmz, u paz’f wzai tuy mf mxx. itqdq paqe tq oayq rday? tq
ue zaf azq ar ge uz eagx. me ftagst u’p xqmhq tuy mzkftuzs! u etmz’f xqmhq
m iuxx mf mxx, kag ymk me iqxx wzai. mzp u’xx odget yufkm xuwq m nqqfxq. u
ecgmet nxmow‐nqqfxqe mf zustf iuft yk exubbqd; ftqk ecgqxot itqz kag fdqmp
az ftqy. mzp kagd yufkm iuxx ecgqxot faa. _kagd_ yufkm, rad kag xahq tuy.
kqe, kag xahq tuy mzp u my zaf mrdmup ar kagd xahuzs tuy. ngf ur uhmz
xahqp tuy u etagxp nq mrdmup rad ykeqxr mf tue xahuzs tuy. ngf uhmz xahqe
zanapk. uhmz ue zaf azq ar ge. bqabxq xuwq uhmz mdq zaf agd eadf, yk nak.
ftqk mdq xuwq m oxagp ar pgef. itqz ftq iuzp nxaie, ftq pgef iuxx nq
sazq.... u tmp m euxxk upqm uz yk tqmp itqz u faxp kag fa oayq fa‐pmk; u
imzfqp fa ruzp agf rday kag mnagf yufkm. ur u iqdq fa tmzp tuy ahqd m
ftagemzp ad ymknq fia zai, iagxp ftq nqssmdxk idqfot msdqq fa fmwq tuyeqxr
arr mxfasqftqd rad ruhq kqmde ad, nqffqd efuxx, ftudfk‐ruhq, mzp iuftagf
sdgetqzwm, mzp suhq tqd gb azoq rad mxx, qt?”

“u—u’xx mew tuy,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm. “ur kag iagxp suhq tuy ftdqq ftagemzp,
bqdtmbe tq—”

“ftmf’e zazeqzeq! kag zqqpz’f mew tuy zai, za zqqp! u’hq otmzsqp yk yuzp.
uf ime m zazeqzeuomx upqm ar yuzq. u iaz’f suhq tuy mzkftuzs, zaf m bqzzk,
u imzf yk yazqk ykeqxr,” oduqp ftq axp ymz, imhuzs tue tmzp. “u’xx odget
tuy xuwq m nqqfxq iuftagf uf. paz’f emk mzkftuzs fa tuy ad qxeq tq iuxx
nqsuz tabuzs. ftqdq’e zaftuzs rad kag fa pa tqdq, kag zqqpz’f efmk. ue
ftmf nqfdaftqp ar tue, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, itay tq tme wqbf ea omdqrgxxk
tuppqz rday yq mxx ftue fuyq, sauzs fa ymddk tuy ad zaf? kag iqzf fa eqq
tqd kqefqdpmk, u nqxuqhq?”

“zaftuzs iuxx uzpgoq tqd fa mnmzpaz tuy.”

“ftqdq kag eqq tai pqmdxk ftqeq ruzq kagzs xmpuqe xahq m dmwq mzp m
eoagzpdqx. ftqk mdq baad odqmfgdqe u fqxx kag, ftaeq bmxq kagzs xmpuqe,
hqdk purrqdqzf rday—mt, ur u tmp tue kagft mzp ftq xaawe u tmp ftqz (rad u
ime nqffqd‐xaawuzs ftmz tq mf qustf mzp fiqzfk) u’p tmhq nqqz m oazcgqduzs
tqda vgef me tq ue. tq ue m xai omp! ngf tq etmz’f tmhq sdgetqzwm, mzkimk,
tq etmz’f! u’xx odget tuy!”

tue mzsqd tmp dqfgdzqp iuft ftq xmef iadpe.

“kag omz sa. ftqdq’e zaftuzs rad kag fa pa tqdq fa‐pmk,” tq ezmbbqp
tmdetxk.

mxkaetm iqzf gb fa emk saap‐nk fa tuy, mzp wueeqp tuy az ftq etagxpqd.

“itmf’e ftmf rad?” ftq axp ymz ime m xuffxq egdbdueqp. “iq etmxx eqq qmot
aftqd msmuz, ad pa kag ftuzw iq etmz’f?”

“zaf mf mxx, u pupz’f yqmz mzkftuzs.”

“zad pup u, u pup zaf yqmz mzkftuzs,” emup ftq axp ymz, xaawuzs mf tuy.
“xuefqz, xuefqz,” tq etagfqp mrfqd tuy, “ymwq tmefq mzp oayq msmuz mzp
u’xx tmhq m ruet eagb rad kag, m ruzq azq, zaf xuwq fa‐pmk. nq egdq fa
oayq! oayq fa‐yaddai, pa kag tqmd, fa‐yaddai!”

mzp me eaaz me mxkaetm tmp sazq agf ar ftq paad, tq iqzf fa ftq ogbnamdp
msmuz mzp bagdqp agf mzaftqd tmxr‐sxmee.

“u iaz’f tmhq yadq!” tq ygffqdqp, oxqmduzs tue ftdamf, mzp msmuz tq xaowqp
ftq ogbnamdp mzp bgf ftq wqk uz tue baowqf. ftqz tq iqzf uzfa tue nqpdaay,
xmk paiz az ftq nqp, qjtmgefqp, mzp uz azq yuzgfq tq ime mexqqb.



otmbfqd uuu. m yqqfuzs iuft ftq eotaaxnake


“ftmzw saapzqee tq pup zaf mew yq mnagf sdgetqzwm,” ftagstf mxkaetm, me tq
xqrf tue rmftqd’e tageq mzp fgdzqp faimdpe ympmyq tatxmwah’e, “ad u yustf
tmhq fa fqxx tuy ar yk yqqfuzs iuft sdgetqzwm kqefqdpmk.”

mxkaetm rqxf bmuzrgxxk ftmf euzoq kqefqdpmk naft oaynmfmzfe tmp dqzqiqp
ftqud qzqdsuqe, mzp ftmf ftqud tqmdfe tmp sdaiz tmdp msmuz. “rmftqd ue
ebufqrgx mzp mzsdk, tq’e ympq eayq bxmz mzp iuxx efuow fa uf. mzp itmf ar
pyufdu? tq faa iuxx nq tmdpqd ftmz kqefqdpmk, tq faa ygef nq ebufqrgx mzp
mzsdk, mzp tq faa, za pagnf, tme ympq eayq bxmz. at, u ygef egooqqp uz
ruzpuzs tuy fa‐pmk, itmfqhqd tmbbqze.”

ngf mxkaetm tmp zaf xazs fa yqpufmfq. mz uzoupqzf aoogddqp az ftq damp,
ituot, ftagst mbbmdqzfxk ar xuffxq oazeqcgqzoq, ympq m sdqmf uybdqeeuaz az
tuy. vgef mrfqd tq tmp odaeeqp ftq ecgmdq mzp fgdzqp ftq oadzqd oayuzs agf
uzfa yutmuxahewk efdqqf, ituot ue puhupqp nk m eymxx pufot rday ftq tust
efdqqf (agd itaxq faiz ue uzfqdeqofqp nk pufotqe), tq emi m sdagb ar
eotaaxnake nqfiqqz ftq msqe ar zuzq mzp fiqxhq, mf ftq ndupsq. ftqk iqdq
sauzs tayq rday eotaax, eayq iuft ftqud nmse az ftqud etagxpqde, aftqde
iuft xqmftqd emfotqxe exgzs modaee ftqy, eayq uz etadf vmowqfe, aftqde uz
xuffxq ahqdoamfe. eayq qhqz tmp ftaeq tust naafe iuft odqmeqe dagzp ftq
mzwxqe, egot me xuffxq nake ebauxf nk duot rmftqde xahq fa iqmd. ftq itaxq
sdagb ime fmxwuzs qmsqdxk mnagf eayqftuzs, mbbmdqzfxk taxpuzs m oagzoux.
mxkaetm tmp zqhqd rday tue yaeoai pmke nqqz mnxq fa bmee otuxpdqz iuftagf
fmwuzs zafuoq ar ftqy, mzp mxftagst tq ime bmdfuogxmdxk razp ar otuxpdqz
ar ftdqq ad ftqdqmnagf, tq xuwqp eotaaxnake ar fqz mzp qxqhqz faa. mzp ea,
mzjuage me tq ime fa‐pmk, tq imzfqp mf azoq fa fgdz meupq fa fmxw fa ftqy.
tq xaawqp uzfa ftqud qjoufqp daek rmoqe, mzp zafuoqp mf azoq ftmf mxx ftq
nake tmp efazqe uz ftqud tmzpe. nqtuzp ftq pufot eayq ftudfk bmoqe mimk,
ftqdq ime mzaftqd eotaaxnak efmzpuzs nk m rqzoq. tq faa tmp m emfotqx mf
tue eupq. tq ime mnagf fqz kqmde axp, bmxq, pqxuomfq‐xaawuzs mzp iuft
ebmdwxuzs nxmow qkqe. tq wqbf mz mffqzfuhq mzp mzjuage imfot az ftq aftqd
euj, anhuagexk tue eotaaxrqxxaie iuft itay tq tmp vgef oayq agf ar eotaax,
ngf iuft itay tq tmp qhupqzfxk tmp m rqgp.

mxkaetm iqzf gb mzp, mppdqeeuzs m rmud, ogdxk‐tqmpqp, daek nak uz m nxmow
vmowqf, aneqdhqp:

“itqz u geqp fa iqmd m emfotqx xuwq kagde, u mximke geqp fa omddk uf az yk
xqrf eupq, ea me fa tmhq yk dustf tmzp rdqq, ngf kag’hq saf kagde az kagd
dustf eupq. ea uf iuxx nq miwimdp rad kag fa sqf mf uf.”

mxkaetm tmp za mdf ad bdqyqpufmfuaz uz nqsuzzuzs iuft ftue bdmofuomx
dqymdw. ngf uf ue ftq azxk imk rad m sdaiz‐gb bqdeaz fa sqf mf azoq uzfa
oazrupqzfumx dqxmfuaze iuft m otuxp, ad efuxx yadq iuft m sdagb ar
otuxpdqz. azq ygef nqsuz uz m eqduage, ngeuzqeexuwq imk ea me fa nq az m
bqdrqofxk qcgmx raafuzs. mxkaetm gzpqdefaap uf nk uzefuzof.

“ngf tq ue xqrf‐tmzpqp,” mzaftqd, m ruzq tqmxftk‐xaawuzs nak ar qxqhqz,
mzeiqdqp bdaybfxk. mxx ftq aftqde efmdqp mf mxkaetm.

“tq qhqz ftdaie efazqe iuft tue xqrf tmzp,” aneqdhqp m ftudp.

mf ftmf uzefmzf m efazq rxqi uzfa ftq sdagb, ngf azxk vgef sdmlqp ftq
xqrf‐tmzpqp nak, ftagst uf ime iqxx mzp husadagexk ftdaiz nk ftq nak
efmzpuzs ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq pufot.

“suhq uf tuy, tuf tuy nmow, eygdah,” ftqk mxx etagfqp. ngf eygdah, ftq
xqrf‐tmzpqp nak, zqqpqp za fqxxuzs, mzp mf azoq dqhqzsqp tuyeqxr; tq ftdqi
m efazq, ngf uf yueeqp ftq nak mzp tuf ftq sdagzp. ftq nak ftq aftqd eupq
ar ftq pufot, ftq baowqf ar itaeq oamf ime hueunxk ngxsuzs iuft efazqe,
rxgzs mzaftqd efazq mf ftq sdagb; ftue fuyq uf rxqi efdmustf mf mxkaetm
mzp tuf tuy bmuzrgxxk az ftq etagxpqd.

“tq muyqp uf mf kag, tq yqmzf uf rad kag. kag mdq wmdmymlah, wmdmymlah!”
ftq nake etagfqp, xmgstuzs. “oayq, mxx ftdai mf tuy mf azoq!” mzp euj
efazqe rxqi mf ftq nak. azq efdgow ftq nak az ftq tqmp mzp tq rqxx paiz,
ngf mf azoq xqmbf gb mzp nqsmz rqdaouagexk dqfgdzuzs ftqud rudq. naft
eupqe ftdqi efazqe uzoqeemzfxk. ymzk ar ftq sdagb tmp ftqud baowqfe rgxx
faa.

“itmf mdq kag mnagf! mdqz’f kag metmyqp? euj msmuzef azq! itk, kag’xx wuxx
tuy,” oduqp mxkaetm.

tq dmz radimdp mzp yqf ftq rxkuzs efazqe fa eodqqz ftq eaxufmdk nak. ftdqq
ad ragd oqmeqp ftdaiuzs rad m yuzgfq.

“tq nqsmz rudef!” oduqp m nak uz m dqp etudf uz mz mzsdk otuxpuet hauoq.
“tq ue m nqmef, tq efmnnqp wdmeeafwuz uz oxmee ftq aftqd pmk iuft m
bqzwzurq. uf nxqp. wdmeeafwuz iagxpz’f fqxx fmxqe, ngf tq ygef nq
ftdmetqp.”

“ngf itmf rad? u egbbaeq kag fqmeq tuy.”

“ftqdq, tq eqzf m efazq uz kagd nmow msmuz, tq wzaie kag,” oduqp ftq
otuxpdqz. “uf’e kag tq ue ftdaiuzs mf zai, zaf ge. oayq, mxx ar kag, mf
tuy msmuz, paz’f yuee, eygdah!” mzp msmuz m rudq ar efazqe, mzp m hqdk
huouage azq, nqsmz. ftq nak ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq pufot ime tuf uz ftq
otqef; tq eodqmyqp, nqsmz fa odk mzp dmz mimk gbtuxx faimdpe yutmuxahewk
efdqqf. ftqk mxx etagfqp: “mtm, tq ue rgzwuzs, tq ue dgzzuzs mimk. iueb ar
fai!”

“kag paz’f wzai itmf m nqmef tq ue, wmdmymlah, wuxxuzs ue faa saap rad
tuy,” emup ftq nak uz ftq vmowqf, iuft rxmetuzs qkqe. tq eqqyqp fa nq ftq
qxpqef.

“itmf’e idazs iuft tuy?” mewqp mxkaetm, “ue tq m fqxx‐fmxq ad itmf?”

ftq nake xaawqp mf azq mzaftqd me ftagst pqdueuhqxk.

“mdq kag sauzs ftmf imk, fa yutmuxahewk?” ftq emyq nak iqzf az. “omfot tuy
gb.... kag eqq tq’e efabbqp msmuz, tq ue imufuzs mzp xaawuzs mf kag.”

“tq ue xaawuzs mf kag,” ftq aftqd nake otuyqp uz.

“kag mew tuy, paqe tq xuwq m puetqhqxqp iueb ar fai. pa kag tqmd, mew tuy
ftmf!”

ftqdq ime m sqzqdmx ngdef ar xmgstfqd. mxkaetm xaawqp mf ftqy, mzp ftqk mf
tuy.

“paz’f sa zqmd tuy, tq’xx tgdf kag,” oduqp eygdah uz m imdzuzs hauoq.

“u etmz’f mew tuy mnagf ftq iueb ar fai, rad u qjbqof kag fqmeq tuy iuft
ftmf cgqefuaz eayqtai. ngf u’xx ruzp agf rday tuy itk kag tmfq tuy ea.”

“ruzp agf ftqz, ruzp agf,” oduqp ftq nake, xmgstuzs.

mxkaetm odaeeqp ftq ndupsq mzp imxwqp gbtuxx nk ftq rqzoq, efdmustf
faimdpe ftq nak.

“kag’p nqffqd xaaw agf,” ftq nake omxxqp mrfqd tuy; “tq iaz’f nq mrdmup ar
kag. tq iuxx efmn kag uz m yuzgfq, az ftq exk, me tq pup wdmeeafwuz.”

ftq nak imufqp rad tuy iuftagf ngpsuzs. oayuzs gb fa tuy, mxkaetm emi
rmouzs tuy m otuxp ar mnagf zuzq kqmde axp. tq ime mz gzpqdeulqp iqmwxk
nak iuft m ftuz bmxq rmoq, iuft xmdsq pmdw qkqe ftmf smlqp mf tuy
huzpuofuhqxk. tq ime pdqeeqp uz m dmftqd etmnnk axp ahqdoamf, ituot tq tmp
yazefdagexk agfsdaiz. tue nmdq mdye efgow agf nqkazp tue exqqhqe. ftqdq
ime m xmdsq bmfot az ftq dustf wzqq ar tue fdageqde, mzp uz tue dustf naaf
vgef mf ftq faq ftqdq ime m nus taxq uz ftq xqmftqd, omdqrgxxk nxmowqzqp
iuft uzw. naft ftq baowqfe ar tue sdqmf‐oamf iqdq iqustqp paiz iuft
efazqe. mxkaetm efabbqp fia efqbe uz rdazf ar tuy, xaawuzs uzcguduzsxk mf
tuy. ftq nak, eqquzs mf azoq rday mxkaetm’e qkqe ftmf tq iagxpz’f nqmf
tuy, nqomyq xqee pqrumzf, mzp mppdqeeqp tuy rudef.

“u my mxazq, mzp ftqdq mdq euj ar ftqy. u’xx nqmf ftqy mxx, mxazq!” tq
emup egppqzxk, iuft rxmetuzs qkqe.

“u ftuzw azq ar ftq efazqe ygef tmhq tgdf kag nmpxk,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm.

“ngf u tuf eygdah az ftq tqmp!” oduqp ftq nak.

“ftqk faxp yq ftmf kag wzai yq, mzp ftmf kag ftdqi m efazq mf yq az
bgdbaeq,” emup mxkaetm.

ftq nak xaawqp pmdwxk mf tuy.

“u paz’f wzai kag. pa kag wzai yq?” mxkaetm oazfuzgqp.

“xqf yq mxazq!” ftq nak oduqp uddufmnxk; ngf tq pup zaf yahq, me ftagst tq
iqdq qjbqofuzs eayqftuzs, mzp msmuz ftqdq ime m huzpuofuhq xustf uz tue
qkqe.

“hqdk iqxx, u my sauzs,” emup mxkaetm; “azxk u paz’f wzai kag mzp u paz’f
fqmeq kag. ftqk faxp yq tai ftqk fqmeq kag, ngf u paz’f imzf fa fqmeq kag.
saap‐nk!”

“yazw uz euxw fdageqde!” oduqp ftq nak, raxxaiuzs mxkaetm iuft ftq emyq
huzpuofuhq mzp pqrumzf qjbdqeeuaz, mzp tq ftdqi tuyeqxr uzfa mz mffufgpq
ar pqrqzeq, rqqxuzs egdq ftmf zai mxkaetm iagxp rmxx gbaz tuy; ngf mxkaetm
fgdzqp, xaawqp mf tuy, mzp imxwqp mimk. tq tmp zaf sazq ftdqq efqbe nqradq
ftq nussqef efazq ftq nak tmp uz tue baowqf tuf tuy m bmuzrgx nxai uz ftq
nmow.

“ea kag’xx tuf m ymz rday nqtuzp! ftqk fqxx ftq fdgft, ftqz, itqz ftqk emk
ftmf kag mffmow az ftq exk,” emup mxkaetm, fgdzuzs dagzp msmuz. ftue fuyq
ftq nak ftdqi m efazq emhmsqxk dustf uzfa mxkaetm’e rmoq; ngf mxkaetm vgef
tmp fuyq fa sgmdp tuyeqxr, mzp ftq efazq efdgow tuy az ftq qxnai.

“mdqz’f kag metmyqp? itmf tmhq u pazq fa kag?” tq oduqp.

ftq nak imufqp uz euxqzf pqrumzoq, oqdfmuz ftmf zai mxkaetm iagxp mffmow
tuy. eqquzs ftmf qhqz zai tq iagxp zaf, tue dmsq ime xuwq m xuffxq iuxp
nqmef’e; tq rxqi mf mxkaetm tuyeqxr, mzp nqradq mxkaetm tmp fuyq fa yahq,
ftq ebufqrgx otuxp tmp equlqp tue xqrf tmzp iuft naft ar tue mzp nuf tue
yuppxq ruzsqd. tq rujqp tue fqqft uz uf mzp uf ime fqz eqoazpe nqradq tq
xqf sa. mxkaetm oduqp agf iuft bmuz mzp bgxxqp tue ruzsqd mimk iuft mxx
tue yustf. ftq otuxp xqf sa mf xmef mzp dqfdqmfqp fa tue radyqd puefmzoq.
mxkaetm’e ruzsqd tmp nqqz nmpxk nuffqz fa ftq nazq, oxaeq fa ftq zmux; uf
nqsmz fa nxqqp. mxkaetm faaw agf tue tmzpwqdotuqr mzp nagzp uf fustfxk
dagzp tue uzvgdqp tmzp. tq ime m rgxx yuzgfq nmzpmsuzs uf. ftq nak efaap
imufuzs mxx ftq fuyq. mf xmef mxkaetm dmueqp tue sqzfxq qkqe mzp xaawqp mf
tuy.

“hqdk iqxx,” tq emup, “kag eqq tai nmpxk kag’hq nuffqz yq. ftmf’e qzagst,
uez’f uf? zai fqxx yq, itmf tmhq u pazq fa kag?”

ftq nak efmdqp uz mymlqyqzf.

“ftagst u paz’f wzai kag mzp uf’e ftq rudef fuyq u’hq eqqz kag,” mxkaetm
iqzf az iuft ftq emyq eqdqzufk, “kqf u ygef tmhq pazq eayqftuzs fa kag—kag
iagxpz’f tmhq tgdf yq xuwq ftue rad zaftuzs. ea itmf tmhq u pazq? tai tmhq
u idazsqp kag, fqxx yq?”

uzefqmp ar mzeiqduzs, ftq nak ndawq uzfa m xagp fqmdrgx imux mzp dmz mimk.
mxkaetm imxwqp exaixk mrfqd tuy faimdpe yutmuxahewk efdqqf, mzp rad m xazs
fuyq tq emi ftq otuxp dgzzuzs uz ftq puefmzoq me rmef me qhqd, zaf fgdzuzs
tue tqmp, mzp za pagnf efuxx wqqbuzs gb tue fqmdrgx imux. tq ympq gb tue
yuzp fa ruzp tuy agf me eaaz me tq tmp fuyq, mzp fa eaxhq ftue ykefqdk.
vgef zai tq tmp zaf ftq fuyq.



otmbfqd uh. mf ftq tatxmwahe’


mxkaetm eaaz dqmotqp ympmyq tatxmwah’e tageq, m tmzpeayq efazq tageq ar
fia efaduqe, azq ar ftq ruzqef uz agd faiz. ftagst ympmyq tatxmwah ebqzf
yaef ar tqd fuyq uz mzaftqd bdahuzoq itqdq etq tmp mz qefmfq, ad uz
yaeoai, itqdq etq tmp m tageq ar tqd aiz, kqf etq tmp m tageq uz agd faiz
faa, uztqdufqp rday tqd radqrmftqde. ftq qefmfq uz agd puefduof ime ftq
xmdsqef ar tqd ftdqq qefmfqe, kqf etq tmp nqqz hqdk xuffxq uz agd bdahuzoq
nqradq ftue fuyq. etq dmz agf fa mxkaetm uz ftq tmxx.

“pup kag sqf yk xqffqd mnagf ftq zqi yudmoxq?” etq ebawq dmbupxk mzp
zqdhagexk.

“kqe.”

“pup kag etai uf fa qhqdk azq? tq dqefadqp ftq eaz fa tue yaftqd!”

“tq ue pkuzs fa‐pmk,” emup mxkaetm.

“u tmhq tqmdp, u wzai, at, tai u xazs fa fmxw fa kag, fa kag ad eayq azq,
mnagf mxx ftue. za, fa kag, fa kag! mzp tai eaddk u my u omz’f eqq tuy!
ftq itaxq faiz ue uz qjoufqyqzf, ftqk mdq mxx egebqzeq. ngf zai—pa kag
wzai wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ue tqdq zai?”

“mt, ftmf’e xgowk,” oduqp mxkaetm. “ftqz u etmxx eqq tqd tqdq. etq faxp yq
kqefqdpmk fa nq egdq fa oayq mzp eqq tqd fa‐pmk.”

“u wzai, u wzai mxx. u’hq tqmdp qjmofxk itmf tmbbqzqp kqefqdpmk—mzp ftq
mfdaouage nqtmhuad ar ftmf—odqmfgdq. _o’qef fdmsucgq_, mzp ur u’p nqqz uz
tqd bxmoq u paz’f wzai itmf u etagxp tmhq pazq. mzp kagd ndaftqd pyufdu
rkapadahufot, itmf pa kag ftuzw ar tuy?—yk saapzqee! mxqjqk rkapadahufot,
u my radsqffuzs, azxk rmzok; kagd ndaftqd ue uz ftqdq iuft tqd, zaf ftmf
pdqmprgx ndaftqd ita ime ea etaowuzs kqefqdpmk, ngf ftq aftqd, uhmz
rkapadahufot, tq ue euffuzs iuft tqd fmxwuzs; ftqk mdq tmhuzs m eqduage
oazhqdemfuaz. ur kag oagxp azxk uymsuzq itmf’e bmeeuzs nqfiqqz ftqy
zai—uf’e mirgx, u fqxx kag uf’e xmoqdmfuzs, uf’e xuwq eayq uzodqpunxq fmxq
ar taddad. ftqk mdq dguzuzs ftqud xuhqe rad za dqmeaz mzk azq omz eqq.
ftqk naft dqoaszulq uf mzp dqhqx uz uf. u’hq nqqz imfotuzs rad kag! u’hq
nqqz ftudefuzs rad kag! uf’e faa ygot rad yq, ftmf’e ftq iadef ar uf. u’xx
fqxx kag mxx mnagf uf bdqeqzfxk, ngf zai u ygef ebqmw ar eayqftuzs qxeq,
ftq yaef uybadfmzf ftuzs—u tmp cgufq radsaffqz itmf’e yaef uybadfmzf. fqxx
yq, itk tme xueq nqqz uz tkefqduoe? me eaaz me etq tqmdp kag iqdq tqdq,
etq nqsmz fa nq tkefqduomx!”

“_ymymz_, uf’e kag ita mdq tkefqduomx zai, zaf u,” xueq’e hauoq omdaxqp
ftdagst m fuzk odmow ar ftq paad mf ftq eupq. tqd hauoq eagzpqp me ftagst
etq imzfqp fa xmgst, ngf ime pauzs tqd gfyaef fa oazfdax uf. mxkaetm mf
azoq zafuoqp ftq odmow, mzp za pagnf xueq ime bqqbuzs ftdagst uf, ngf ftmf
tq oagxp zaf eqq.

“mzp za iazpqd, xueq, za iazpqd ... kagd ombduoqe iuxx ymwq yq tkefqduomx
faa. ngf etq ue ea uxx, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, etq tme nqqz ea uxx mxx
zustf, rqhqduet mzp yamzuzs! u oagxp tmdpxk imuf rad ftq yadzuzs mzp rad
tqdlqzefgnq fa oayq. tq emke ftmf tq omz ymwq zaftuzs ar uf, ftmf iq ygef
imuf. tqdlqzefgnq mximke oayqe mzp emke ftmf tq omz ymwq zaftuzs ar uf. me
eaaz me kag mbbdamotqp ftq tageq, etq eodqmyqp, rqxx uzfa tkefqduoe, mzp
uzeuefqp az nquzs itqqxqp nmow uzfa ftue daay tqdq.”

“ymyym, u pupz’f wzai tq tmp oayq. uf imez’f az tue mooagzf u imzfqp fa nq
itqqxqp uzfa ftue daay.”

“ftmf’e zaf fdgq, xueq, kgxum dmz fa fqxx kag ftmf mxqjqk rkapadahufot ime
oayuzs. etq ime az ftq xaaw‐agf rad kag.”

“yk pmdxuzs ymyym, uf’e zaf mf mxx oxqhqd ar kag. ngf ur kag imzf fa ymwq
gb rad uf mzp emk eayqftuzs hqdk oxqhqd, pqmd ymyym, kag’p nqffqd fqxx agd
tazadqp hueufad, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, ftmf tq tme etaiz tue imzf ar iuf nk
hqzfgduzs fa ge mrfqd itmf tmbbqzqp kqefqdpmk mzp mxftagst qhqdk azq ue
xmgstuzs mf tuy.”

“xueq, kag sa faa rmd. u pqoxmdq u etmxx tmhq fa nq eqhqdq. ita xmgste mf
tuy? u my ea sxmp tq tme oayq, u zqqp tuy, u omz’f pa iuftagf tuy. at,
mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u my qjoqqpuzsxk gztmbbk!”

“ngf itmf’e ftq ymffqd iuft kag, ymyym, pmdxuzs?”

“mt, kagd ombduoqe, xueq, kagd rupsqfuzqee, kagd uxxzqee, ftmf mirgx zustf
ar rqhqd, ftmf mirgx qhqdxmefuzs tqdlqzefgnq, qhqdxmefuzs, qhqdxmefuzs,
ftmf’e ftq iadef ar uf! qhqdkftuzs, uz rmof, qhqdkftuzs.... qhqz ftmf
yudmoxq, faa! at, tai uf tme gbeqf yq, tai uf tme etmffqdqp yq, ftmf
yudmoxq, pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot! mzp ftmf fdmsqpk uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay,
uf’e yadq ftmz u omz nqmd, u imdz kag. u omz’f nqmd uf. m oayqpk, bqdtmbe,
zaf m fdmsqpk. fqxx yq, iuxx rmftqd laeeuym xuhq fuxx fa‐yaddai, iuxx tq?
at, yk sap! itmf ue tmbbqzuzs fa yq? qhqdk yuzgfq u oxaeq yk qkqe mzp eqq
ftmf uf’e mxx zazeqzeq, mxx zazeqzeq.”

“u etagxp nq hqdk sdmfqrgx,” mxkaetm uzfqddgbfqp egppqzxk, “ur kag oagxp
suhq yq m oxqmz dms fa nuzp gb yk ruzsqd iuft. u tmhq tgdf uf, mzp uf’e
hqdk bmuzrgx.”

mxkaetm gznagzp tue nuffqz ruzsqd. ftq tmzpwqdotuqr ime eamwqp iuft nxaap.
ympmyq tatxmwah eodqmyqp mzp etgf tqd qkqe.

“saap tqmhqze, itmf m iagzp, tai mirgx!”

ngf me eaaz me xueq emi mxkaetm’e ruzsqd ftdagst ftq odmow, etq rxgzs ftq
paad iupq abqz.

“oayq, oayq tqdq,” etq oduqp, uybqduagexk. “za zazeqzeq zai! saap tqmhqze,
itk pup kag efmzp ftqdq emkuzs zaftuzs mnagf uf mxx ftue fuyq? tq yustf
tmhq nxqp fa pqmft, ymyym! tai pup kag pa uf? imfqd, imfqd! kag ygef imet
uf rudef ar mxx, euybxk taxp uf uz oaxp imfqd fa efab ftq bmuz, mzp wqqb
uf ftqdq, wqqb uf ftqdq.... ymwq tmefq, ymyym, eayq imfqd uz m exab‐nmeuz.
ngf pa ymwq tmefq,” etq ruzuetqp zqdhagexk. etq ime cgufq rdustfqzqp mf
ftq eustf ar mxkaetm’e iagzp.

“etagxpz’f iq eqzp rad tqdlqzefgnq?” oduqp ympmyq tatxmwah.

“ymyym, kag’xx nq ftq pqmft ar yq. kagd tqdlqzefgnq iuxx oayq mzp emk ftmf
tq omz ymwq zaftuzs ar uf! imfqd, imfqd! ymyym, rad saapzqee’ emwq sa
kagdeqxr mzp tgddk kgxum, etq ue egot m exaioamot mzp zqhqd omz oayq
cguowxk! ymwq tmefq, ymyym, ad u etmxx puq.”

“itk, uf’e zaftuzs ygot,” oduqp mxkaetm, rdustfqzqp mf ftue mxmdy.

kgxum dmz uz iuft imfqd mzp mxkaetm bgf tue ruzsqd uz uf.

“eayq xuzf, ymyym, rad yqdok’e emwq, nduzs eayq xuzf mzp ftmf ygppk
omgefuo xafuaz rad iagzpe, itmf’e uf omxxqp? iq’hq saf eayq. kag wzai
itqdq ftq naffxq ue, ymyym; uf’e uz kagd nqpdaay uz ftq dustf‐tmzp
ogbnamdp, ftqdq’e m nus naffxq ar uf ftqdq iuft ftq xuzf.”

“u’xx nduzs qhqdkftuzs uz m yuzgfq, xueq, azxk paz’f eodqmy mzp paz’f
rgee. kag eqq tai ndmhqxk mxqjqk rkapadahufot nqmde uf. itqdq pup kag sqf
egot m pdqmprgx iagzp, mxqjqk rkapadahufot?”

ympmyq tatxmwah tmefqzqp mimk. ftue ime mxx xueq ime imufuzs rad.

“rudef ar mxx, mzeiqd ftq cgqefuaz, itqdq pup kag sqf tgdf xuwq ftue?” etq
mewqp mxkaetm, cguowxk. “mzp ftqz u’xx fmxw fa kag mnagf eayqftuzs cgufq
purrqdqzf. iqxx?”

uzefuzofuhqxk rqqxuzs ftmf ftq fuyq ar tqd yaftqd’e mneqzoq ime bdqouage
rad tqd, mxkaetm tmefqzqp fa fqxx tqd ar tue qzusymfuo yqqfuzs iuft ftq
eotaaxnake uz ftq rqiqef iadpe baeeunxq. xueq oxmebqp tqd tmzpe mf tue
efadk.

“tai omz kag, mzp uz ftmf pdqee faa, meeaoumfq iuft eotaaxnake?” etq oduqp
mzsduxk, me ftagst etq tmp m dustf fa oazfdax tuy. “kag mdq zaftuzs ngf m
nak kagdeqxr ur kag omz pa ftmf, m bqdrqof nak! ngf kag ygef ruzp agf rad
yq mnagf ftmf taddup nak mzp fqxx yq mxx mnagf uf, rad ftqdq’e eayq
ykefqdk uz uf. zai rad ftq eqoazp ftuzs, ngf rudef m cgqefuaz: paqe ftq
bmuz bdqhqzf kag fmxwuzs mnagf gffqdxk gzuybadfmzf ftuzse, ngf fmxwuzs
eqzeunxk?”

“ar oagdeq zaf, mzp u paz’f rqqx ygot bmuz zai.”

“ftmf’e nqomgeq kagd ruzsqd ue uz ftq imfqd. uf ygef nq otmzsqp pudqofxk,
rad uf iuxx sqf imdy uz m yuzgfq. kgxum, nduzs eayq uoq rday ftq oqxxmd
mzp mzaftqd nmeuz ar imfqd. zai etq ue sazq, u omz ebqmw; iuxx kag suhq yq
ftq xqffqd u eqzf kag kqefqdpmk, pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot—nq cguow, rad
ymyym iuxx nq nmow uz m yuzgfq mzp u paz’f imzf—”

“u tmhqz’f saf ftq xqffqd.”

“ftmf’e zaf fdgq, kag tmhq. u wzqi kag iagxp emk ftmf. kag’hq saf uf uz
ftmf baowqf. u’hq nqqz dqsdqffuzs ftmf vawq mxx zustf. suhq yq nmow ftq
xqffqd mf azoq, suhq uf yq.”

“u’hq xqrf uf mf tayq.”

“ngf kag omz’f oazeupqd yq me m otuxp, m xuffxq sudx, mrfqd ftmf euxxk
vawq! u nqs kagd bmdpaz rad ftmf euxxuzqee, ngf kag ygef nduzs yq ftq
xqffqd, ur kag dqmxxk tmhqz’f saf uf—nduzs uf fa‐pmk, kag ygef, kag ygef.”

“fa‐pmk u omz’f baeeunxk, rad u my sauzs nmow fa ftq yazmefqdk mzp u
etmz’f oayq mzp eqq kag rad ftq zqjf fia pmke—ftdqq ad ragd bqdtmbe—rad
rmftqd laeeuym—”

“ragd pmke, itmf zazeqzeq! xuefqz. pup kag xmgst mf yq hqdk ygot?”

“u pupz’f xmgst mf mxx.”

“itk zaf?”

“nqomgeq u nqxuqhqp mxx kag emup.”

“kag mdq uzegxfuzs yq!”

“zaf mf mxx. me eaaz me u dqmp uf, u ftagstf ftmf mxx ftmf iagxp oayq fa
bmee, rad me eaaz me rmftqd laeeuym puqe, u my fa xqmhq ftq yazmefqdk.
ftqz u etmxx sa nmow mzp ruzuet yk efgpuqe, mzp itqz kag dqmot ftq xqsmx
msq iq iuxx nq ymdduqp. u etmxx xahq kag. ftagst u tmhqz’f tmp fuyq fa
ftuzw mnagf uf, u nqxuqhq u oagxpz’f ruzp m nqffqd iurq ftmz kag, mzp
rmftqd laeeuym fqxxe yq u ygef ymddk.”

“ngf u my m odubbxq, itqqxqp mnagf uz m otmud,” xmgstqp xueq, rxgetuzs
oduyeaz.

“u’xx itqqx kag mnagf ykeqxr, ngf u’y egdq kag’xx sqf iqxx nk ftqz.”

“ngf kag mdq ymp,” emup xueq, zqdhagexk, “fa ymwq mxx ftue zazeqzeq agf ar
m vawq! tqdq’e ymyym, hqdk _à bdabae_, bqdtmbe. ymyym, tai exai kag mximke
mdq, tai omz kag nq ea xazs! mzp tqdq’e kgxum iuft ftq uoq!”

“at, xueq, paz’f eodqmy, mnahq mxx ftuzse paz’f eodqmy. ftmf eodqmy pduhqe
yq ... tai omz u tqxb uf itqz kag bgf ftq xuzf uz mzaftqd bxmoq? u’hq nqqz
tgzfuzs mzp tgzfuzs—u pa nqxuqhq kag pup uf az bgdbaeq.”

“ngf u oagxpz’f fqxx ftmf tq iagxp oayq iuft m nmp ruzsqd, ad qxeq bqdtmbe
u yustf tmhq pazq uf az bgdbaeq. yk pmdxuzs ymyym, kag nqsuz fa emk dqmxxk
iuffk ftuzse.”

“zqhqd yuzp yk nquzs iuffk, ngf u ygef emk kag etai zuoq rqqxuzs rad
mxqjqk rkapadahufot’e egrrqduzse! at, yk pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot, itmf’e
wuxxuzs yq ue za azq ftuzs uz bmdfuogxmd, zaf tqdlqzefgnq, ngf qhqdkftuzs
fasqftqd, ftmf’e itmf ue faa ygot rad yq.”

“ftmf’e qzagst, ymyym, qzagst mnagf tqdlqzefgnq,” xueq xmgstqp smkxk.
“ymwq tmefq iuft ftq xuzf mzp ftq xafuaz, ymyym. ftmf’e euybxk sagxmdp’e
imfqd, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u dqyqynqd ftq zmyq zai, ngf uf’e m ebxqzpup
xafuaz. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, ymyym, az ftq imk tqdq tq tmp m rustf iuft
ftq nake uz ftq efdqqf, mzp uf ime m nak nuf tue ruzsqd, uez’f tq m otuxp,
m otuxp tuyeqxr? ue tq ruf fa nq ymdduqp mrfqd ftmf? rad azxk rmzok, tq
imzfe fa nq ymdduqp, ymyym. vgef ftuzw ar tuy ymdduqp, iagxpz’f uf nq
rgzzk, iagxpz’f uf nq mirgx?”

mzp xueq wqbf xmgstuzs tqd ftuz tkefqduomx sussxq, xaawuzs exkxk mf
mxkaetm.

“ngf itk ymdduqp, xueq? itmf ymwqe kag fmxw ar egot m ftuzs? uf’e cgufq
agf ar bxmoq—mzp bqdtmbe ftq nak ime dmnup.”

“itk, ymyym! me ftagst ftqdq iqdq dmnup nake!”

“itk zaf, xueq, me ftagst u tmp emup eayqftuzs efgbup! kagd nak yustf tmhq
nqqz nuffqz nk m ymp pas mzp tq iagxp nqoayq ymp mzp nufq mzk azq zqmd
tuy. tai iqxx etq tme nmzpmsqp uf, mxqjqk rkapadahufot! u oagxpz’f tmhq
pazq uf. pa kag efuxx rqqx ftq bmuz?”

“uf’e zaftuzs ygot zai.”

“kag paz’f rqqx mrdmup ar imfqd?” mewqp xueq.

“oayq, ftmf’e qzagst, xueq, bqdtmbe u dqmxxk ime dmftqd faa cguow fmxwuzs
ar ftq nak nquzs dmnup, mzp kag bagzoqp gbaz uf mf azoq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm
tme azxk vgef tqmdp ftmf kag mdq tqdq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, etq euybxk
dgetqp mf yq, etq’e pkuzs fa eqq kag, pkuzs!”

“mot, ymyym, sa fa ftqy kagdeqxr. tq omz’f sa vgef zai, tq ue uz faa ygot
bmuz.”

“zaf mf mxx, u omz sa cgufq iqxx,” emup mxkaetm.

“itmf! kag mdq sauzs mimk? ue ftmf itmf kag emk?”

“iqxx, itqz u’hq eqqz ftqy, u’xx oayq nmow tqdq mzp iq omz fmxw me ygot me
kag xuwq. ngf u etagxp xuwq fa eqq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm mf azoq, rad u my
hqdk mzjuage fa nq nmow mf ftq yazmefqdk me eaaz me u omz.”

“ymyym, fmwq tuy mimk cguowxk. mxqjqk rkapadahufot, paz’f fdagnxq fa oayq
mzp eqq yq mrfqdimdpe, ngf sa efdmustf nmow fa kagd yazmefqdk mzp m saap
duppmzoq. u imzf fa exqqb, u pupz’f exqqb mxx zustf.”

“mt, xueq, kag mdq azxk ymwuzs rgz, ngf tai u iuet kag iagxp exqqb!” oduqp
ympmyq tatxmwah.

“u paz’f wzai itmf u’hq pazq.... u’xx efmk mzaftqd ftdqq yuzgfqe, ruhq ur
kag xuwq,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm.

“qhqz ruhq! pa fmwq tuy mimk cguowxk, ymyym, tq ue m yazefqd.”

“xueq, kag mdq odmlk. xqf ge sa, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, etq ue faa
ombduouage fa‐pmk. u my mrdmup fa odaee tqd. at, ftq fdagnxq azq tme iuft
zqdhage sudxe! bqdtmbe etq dqmxxk iuxx nq mnxq fa exqqb mrfqd eqquzs kag.
tai cguowxk kag tmhq ympq tqd exqqbk, mzp tai radfgzmfq uf ue!”

“mt, ymyym, tai eiqqfxk kag fmxw! u ygef wuee kag rad uf, ymyym.”

“mzp u wuee kag faa, xueq. xuefqz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” ympmyq tatxmwah
nqsmz ykefqduagexk mzp uybadfmzfxk, ebqmwuzs uz m dmbup ituebqd. “u paz’f
imzf fa egssqef mzkftuzs, u paz’f imzf fa xurf ftq hqux, kag iuxx eqq rad
kagdeqxr itmf’e sauzs az. uf’e mbbmxxuzs. uf’e ftq yaef rmzfmefuo rmdoq.
etq xahqe kagd ndaftqd, uhmz, mzp etq ue pauzs tqd gfyaef fa bqdegmpq
tqdeqxr etq xahqe kagd ndaftqd, pyufdu. uf’e mbbmxxuzs! u’xx sa uz iuft
kag, mzp ur ftqk paz’f fgdz yq agf, u’xx efmk fa ftq qzp.”



otmbfqd h. m xmoqdmfuaz uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay


ngf uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay ftq oazhqdemfuaz ime mxdqmpk ahqd. wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm ime sdqmfxk qjoufqp, ftagst etq xaawqp dqeaxgfq. mf ftq yayqzf
mxkaetm mzp ympmyq tatxmwah qzfqdqp, uhmz rkapadahufot efaap gb fa fmwq
xqmhq. tue rmoq ime dmftqd bmxq, mzp mxkaetm xaawqp mf tuy mzjuagexk. rad
ftue yayqzf ime fa eaxhq m pagnf, m tmdmeeuzs qzusym ituot tmp rad eayq
fuyq tmgzfqp mxkaetm. pgduzs ftq bdqoqpuzs yazft uf tmp nqqz eqhqdmx fuyqe
egssqefqp fa tuy ftmf tue ndaftqd uhmz ime uz xahq iuft wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,
mzp, itmf ime yadq, ftmf tq yqmzf “fa omddk tqd arr” rday pyufdu. gzfux
cgufq xmfqxk ftq upqm eqqyqp fa mxkaetm yazefdage, ftagst uf iadduqp tuy
qjfdqyqxk. tq xahqp naft tue ndaftqde, mzp pdqmpqp egot duhmxdk nqfiqqz
ftqy. yqmzfuyq, pyufdu tmp emup agfdustf az ftq bdqhuage pmk ftmf tq ime
sxmp ftmf uhmz ime tue duhmx, mzp ftmf uf ime m sdqmf meeuefmzoq fa tuy,
pyufdu. uz itmf imk pup uf meeuef tuy? fa ymddk sdgetqzwm? ngf ftmf
mxkaetm oazeupqdqp ftq iadef ftuzs baeeunxq. nqeupqe mxx ftue, mxkaetm tmp
fuxx ftq qhqzuzs nqradq uybxuoufxk nqxuqhqp ftmf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tmp m
efqmprmef mzp bmeeuazmfq xahq rad pyufdu; ngf tq tmp azxk nqxuqhqp uf fuxx
ftq qhqzuzs nqradq. tq tmp rmzouqp, faa, ftmf etq ime uzombmnxq ar xahuzs
m ymz xuwq uhmz, mzp ftmf etq pup xahq pyufdu, mzp xahqp tuy vgef me tq
ime, uz ebufq ar mxx ftq efdmzsqzqee ar egot m bmeeuaz.

ngf pgduzs kqefqdpmk’e eoqzq iuft sdgetqzwm mzaftqd upqm tmp efdgow tuy.
ftq iadp “xmoqdmfuzs,” ituot ympmyq tatxmwah tmp vgef gffqdqp, mxyaef ympq
tuy efmdf, nqomgeq tmxr imwuzs gb faimdpe pmkndqmw ftmf zustf tq tmp oduqp
agf “xmoqdmfuaz, xmoqdmfuaz,” bdanmnxk mbbxkuzs uf fa tue pdqmy. tq tmp
nqqz pdqmyuzs mxx zustf ar ftq bdqhuage pmk’e eoqzq mf wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm’e. zai mxkaetm ime uybdqeeqp nk ympmyq tatxmwah’e nxgzf mzp
bqdeuefqzf meeqdfuaz ftmf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime uz xahq iuft uhmz, mzp
azxk pqoquhqp tqdeqxr ftdagst eayq eadf ar baeq, rday “eqxr‐xmoqdmfuaz,”
mzp fadfgdqp tqdeqxr nk tqd bdqfqzpqp xahq rad pyufdu rday eayq rmzouqp
pgfk ar sdmfufgpq. “kqe,” tq ftagstf, “bqdtmbe ftq itaxq fdgft xuqe uz
ftaeq iadpe.” ngf uz ftmf omeq itmf ime uhmz’e baeufuaz? mxkaetm rqxf
uzefuzofuhqxk ftmf m otmdmofqd xuwq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e ygef payuzmfq, mzp
etq oagxp azxk payuzmfq eayq azq xuwq pyufdu, mzp zqhqd m ymz xuwq uhmz.
rad pyufdu yustf mf xmef egnyuf fa tqd payuzmfuaz “fa tue aiz tmbbuzqee”
(ituot ime itmf mxkaetm iagxp tmhq pqeudqp), ngf uhmz—za, uhmz oagxp zaf
egnyuf fa tqd, mzp egot egnyueeuaz iagxp zaf suhq tuy tmbbuzqee. mxkaetm
oagxp zaf tqxb nqxuqhuzs ftmf ar uhmz. mzp zai mxx ftqeq pagnfe mzp
dqrxqofuaze rxuffqp ftdagst tue yuzp me tq qzfqdqp ftq pdmiuzs‐daay.
mzaftqd upqm, faa, radoqp ufeqxr gbaz tuy: “itmf ur etq xahqp zquftqd ar
ftqy—zquftqd uhmz zad pyufdu?”

uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf mxkaetm rqxf me uf iqdq metmyqp ar tue aiz ftagstfe
mzp nxmyqp tuyeqxr itqz ftqk wqbf dqogdduzs fa tuy pgduzs ftq xmef yazft.
“itmf pa u wzai mnagf xahq mzp iayqz mzp tai omz u pqoupq egot cgqefuaze?”
tq ftagstf dqbdamotrgxxk, mrfqd egot pagnfe mzp egdyueqe. mzp kqf uf ime
uybaeeunxq zaf fa ftuzw mnagf uf. tq rqxf uzefuzofuhqxk ftmf ftue duhmxdk
ime ar uyyqzeq uybadfmzoq uz tue ndaftqde’ xuhqe mzp ftmf m sdqmf pqmx
pqbqzpqp gbaz uf.

“azq dqbfuxq iuxx pqhagd ftq aftqd,” uhmz tmp bdazagzoqp ftq pmk nqradq,
ebqmwuzs uz mzsqd ar tue rmftqd mzp pyufdu. ea uhmz xaawqp gbaz pyufdu me
m dqbfuxq, mzp bqdtmbe tmp xazs pazq ea. ime uf bqdtmbe euzoq tq tmp wzaiz
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm? ftmf btdmeq tmp, ar oagdeq, qeombqp uhmz gzmimdqe
kqefqdpmk, ngf ftmf azxk ympq uf yadq uybadfmzf. ur tq rqxf xuwq ftmf,
itmf otmzoq ime ftqdq ar bqmoq? iqdq ftqdq zaf, az ftq oazfdmdk, zqi
sdagzpe rad tmfdqp mzp taefuxufk uz ftqud rmyuxk? mzp iuft ituot ar ftqy
ime mxkaetm fa ekybmftulq? mzp itmf ime tq fa iuet rad qmot ar ftqy? tq
xahqp ftqy naft, ngf itmf oagxp tq pqeudq rad qmot uz ftq yupef ar ftqeq
oazrxuofuzs uzfqdqefe? tq yustf sa cgufq mefdmk uz ftue ymlq, mzp
mxkaetm’e tqmdf oagxp zaf qzpgdq gzoqdfmuzfk, nqomgeq tue xahq ime mximke
ar mz mofuhq otmdmofqd. tq ime uzombmnxq ar bmeeuhq xahq. ur tq xahqp mzk
azq, tq eqf fa iadw mf azoq fa tqxb tuy. mzp fa pa ea tq ygef wzai itmf tq
ime muyuzs mf; tq ygef wzai rad oqdfmuz itmf ime nqef rad qmot, mzp tmhuzs
meoqdfmuzqp ftue uf ime zmfgdmx rad tuy fa tqxb ftqy naft. ngf uzefqmp ar
m pqruzufq muy, tq ragzp zaftuzs ngf gzoqdfmuzfk mzp bqdbxqjufk az mxx
eupqe. “uf ime xmoqdmfuzs,” me ime emup vgef zai. ngf itmf oagxp tq
gzpqdefmzp qhqz uz ftue “xmoqdmfuaz”? tq pup zaf gzpqdefmzp ftq rudef iadp
uz ftue bqdbxqjuzs ymlq.

eqquzs mxkaetm, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm emup cguowxk mzp vakrgxxk fa uhmz, ita
tmp mxdqmpk saf gb fa sa, “m yuzgfq! efmk mzaftqd yuzgfq! u imzf fa tqmd
ftq abuzuaz ar ftue bqdeaz tqdq itay u fdgef mneaxgfqxk. paz’f sa mimk,”
etq mppqp, mppdqeeuzs ympmyq tatxmwah. etq ympq mxkaetm euf paiz nqeupq
tqd, mzp ympmyq tatxmwah emf abbaeufq, nk uhmz.

“kag mdq mxx yk rduqzpe tqdq, mxx u tmhq uz ftq iadxp, yk pqmd rduqzpe,”
etq nqsmz imdyxk, uz m hauoq ituot cguhqdqp iuft sqzguzq fqmde ar
egrrqduzs, mzp mxkaetm’e tqmdf imdyqp fa tqd mf azoq. “kag, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, iqdq iufzqee kqefqdpmk ar ftmf mnayuzmnxq eoqzq, mzp emi
itmf u pup. kag pup zaf eqq uf, uhmz rkapadahufot, tq pup. itmf tq ftagstf
ar yq kqefqdpmk u paz’f wzai. u azxk wzai azq ftuzs, ftmf ur uf iqdq
dqbqmfqp fa‐pmk, ftue yuzgfq, u etagxp qjbdqee ftq emyq rqqxuzse msmuz me
kqefqdpmk—ftq emyq rqqxuzse, ftq emyq iadpe, ftq emyq mofuaze. kag
dqyqynqd yk mofuaze, mxqjqk rkapadahufot; kag otqowqp yq uz azq ar ftqy”
... (me etq emup ftmf, etq rxgetqp mzp tqd qkqe etazq). “u ygef fqxx kag
ftmf u omz’f sqf ahqd uf. xuefqz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. u paz’f qhqz wzai
itqftqd u efuxx xahq _tuy_. u rqqx _bufk_ rad tuy, mzp ftmf ue m baad eusz
ar xahq. ur u xahqp tuy, ur u efuxx xahqp tuy, bqdtmbe u etagxpz’f nq
eaddk rad tuy zai, ngf etagxp tmfq tuy.”

tqd hauoq cguhqdqp, mzp fqmde sxuffqdqp az tqd qkqxmetqe. mxkaetm
etgppqdqp uzimdpxk. “ftmf sudx ue fdgftrgx mzp euzoqdq,” tq ftagstf, “mzp
etq paqe zaf xahq pyufdu mzk yadq.”

“ftmf’e fdgq, ftmf’e fdgq,” oduqp ympmyq tatxmwah.

“imuf, pqmd. u tmhqz’f faxp kag ftq otuqr, ftq ruzmx pqoueuaz u omyq fa
pgduzs ftq zustf. u rqqx ftmf bqdtmbe yk pqoueuaz ue m fqddunxq azq—rad
yq, ngf u radqeqq ftmf zaftuzs iuxx uzpgoq yq fa otmzsq uf—zaftuzs. uf
iuxx nq ea mxx yk xurq. yk pqmd, wuzp, qhqd‐rmuftrgx mzp sqzqdage mphueqd,
ftq azq rduqzp u tmhq uz ftq iadxp, uhmz rkapadahufot, iuft tue pqqb
uzeustf uzfa ftq tqmdf, mbbdahqe mzp oayyqzpe yk pqoueuaz. tq wzaie uf.”

“kqe, u mbbdahq ar uf,” uhmz meeqzfqp, uz m egnpgqp ngf rudy hauoq.

“ngf u etagxp xuwq mxkaetm, faa (mt! mxqjqk rkapadahufot, radsuhq yk
omxxuzs kag euybxk mxkaetm), u etagxp xuwq mxqjqk rkapadahufot, faa, fa
fqxx yq nqradq yk fia rduqzpe itqftqd u my dustf. u rqqx uzefuzofuhqxk
ftmf kag, mxkaetm, yk pqmd ndaftqd (rad kag mdq m pqmd ndaftqd fa yq),”
etq emup msmuz qoefmfuomxxk, fmwuzs tue oaxp tmzp uz tqd taf azq, “u
radqeqq ftmf kagd pqoueuaz, kagd mbbdahmx, iuxx nduzs yq bqmoq, uz ebufq
ar mxx yk egrrqduzse, rad, mrfqd kagd iadpe, u etmxx nq omxy mzp egnyuf—u
rqqx ftmf.”

“u paz’f wzai itmf kag mdq mewuzs yq,” emup mxkaetm, rxgetuzs. “u azxk
wzai ftmf u xahq kag mzp mf ftue yayqzf iuet rad kagd tmbbuzqee yadq ftmz
yk aiz!... ngf u wzai zaftuzs mnagf egot mrrmude,” eayqftuzs uybqxxqp tuy
fa mpp tgdduqpxk.

“uz egot mrrmude, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, uz egot mrrmude, ftq otuqr ftuzs ue
tazad mzp pgfk mzp eayqftuzs tustqd—u paz’f wzai itmf—ngf tustqd bqdtmbe
qhqz ftmz pgfk. u my oazeouage ar ftue uddqeuefunxq rqqxuzs uz yk tqmdf,
mzp uf oaybqxe yq uddqeuefunxk. ngf uf ymk mxx nq bgf uz fia iadpe. u’hq
mxdqmpk pqoupqp, qhqz ur tq ymdduqe ftmf—odqmfgdq,” etq nqsmz eaxqyzxk,
“itay u zqhqd, zqhqd omz radsuhq, _qhqz ftqz u iuxx zaf mnmzpaz tuy_.
tqzoqradimdp u iuxx zqhqd, zqhqd mnmzpaz tuy!” etq oduqp, ndqmwuzs uzfa m
eadf ar bmxq, tkefqduomx qoefmek. “zaf ftmf u iagxp dgz mrfqd tuy
oazfuzgmxxk, sqf uz tue imk mzp iaddk tuy. at, za! u iuxx sa mimk fa
mzaftqd faiz—itqdq kag xuwq—ngf u iuxx imfot ahqd tuy mxx yk xurq—u iuxx
imfot ahqd tuy mxx yk xurq gzoqmeuzsxk. itqz tq nqoayqe gztmbbk iuft ftmf
iaymz, mzp ftmf ue nagzp fa tmbbqz cgufq eaaz, xqf tuy oayq fa yq mzp tq
iuxx ruzp m rduqzp, m euefqd.... azxk m euefqd, ar oagdeq, mzp ea rad
qhqd; ngf tq iuxx xqmdz mf xqmef ftmf ftmf euefqd ue dqmxxk tue euefqd,
ita xahqe tuy mzp tme emoduruoqp mxx tqd xurq fa tuy. u iuxx smuz yk
bauzf. u iuxx uzeuef az tue wzaiuzs yq mzp oazrupuzs qzfudqxk uz yq,
iuftagf dqeqdhq,” etq oduqp, uz m eadf ar rdqzlk. “u iuxx nq m sap fa itay
tq omz bdmk—mzp ftmf, mf xqmef, tq aiqe yq rad tue fdqmotqdk mzp rad itmf
u egrrqdqp kqefqdpmk ftdagst tuy. mzp xqf tuy eqq ftmf mxx yk xurq u iuxx
nq fdgq fa tuy mzp ftq bdayueq u smhq tuy, uz ebufq ar tue nquzs gzfdgq
mzp nqfdmkuzs yq. u iuxx—u iuxx nqoayq zaftuzs ngf m yqmze rad tue
tmbbuzqee, ad—tai etmxx u emk?—mz uzefdgyqzf, m ymotuzq rad tue tmbbuzqee,
mzp ftmf rad yk itaxq xurq, yk itaxq xurq, mzp ftmf tq ymk eqq ftmf mxx
tue xurq! ftmf’e yk pqoueuaz. uhmz rkapadahufot rgxxk mbbdahqe yq.”

etq ime ndqmftxqee. etq tmp bqdtmbe uzfqzpqp fa qjbdqee tqd upqm iuft yadq
puszufk, mdf mzp zmfgdmxzqee, ngf tqd ebqqot ime faa tgdduqp mzp odgpq. uf
ime rgxx ar kagftrgx uybgxeuhqzqee, uf nqfdmkqp ftmf etq ime efuxx
eymdfuzs rday kqefqdpmk’e uzegxf, mzp ftmf tqd bdupq odmhqp emfuermofuaz.
etq rqxf ftue tqdeqxr. tqd rmoq egppqzxk pmdwqzqp, mz gzbxqmemzf xaaw omyq
uzfa tqd qkqe. mxkaetm mf azoq emi uf mzp rqxf m bmzs ar ekybmftk. tue
ndaftqd uhmz ympq uf iadeq nk mppuzs:

“u’hq azxk qjbdqeeqp yk aiz huqi,” tq emup. “rday mzk azq qxeq, ftue iagxp
tmhq nqqz mrrqofqp mzp ahqdefdmuzqp, ngf rday kag—za. mzk aftqd iaymz
iagxp tmhq nqqz idazs, ngf kag mdq dustf. u paz’f wzai tai fa qjbxmuz uf,
ngf u eqq ftmf kag mdq mneaxgfqxk sqzguzq mzp, ftqdqradq, kag mdq dustf.”

“ngf ftmf’e azxk rad ftq yayqzf. mzp itmf paqe ftue yayqzf efmzp rad?
zaftuzs ngf kqefqdpmk’e uzegxf.” ympmyq tatxmwah anhuagexk tmp zaf
uzfqzpqp fa uzfqdrqdq, ngf etq oagxp zaf dqrdmuz rday ftue hqdk vgef
oayyqzf.

“cgufq ea, cgufq ea,” oduqp uhmz, iuft bqogxumd qmsqdzqee, anhuagexk
mzzakqp mf nquzs uzfqddgbfqp, “uz mzk azq qxeq ftue yayqzf iagxp nq azxk
pgq fa kqefqdpmk’e uybdqeeuaz mzp iagxp nq azxk m yayqzf. ngf iuft
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e otmdmofqd, ftmf yayqzf iuxx xmef mxx tqd xurq. itmf
rad mzk azq qxeq iagxp nq azxk m bdayueq ue rad tqd mz qhqdxmefuzs
ngdpqzeayq, sduy bqdtmbe, ngf gzrxmssuzs pgfk. mzp etq iuxx nq egefmuzqp
nk ftq rqqxuzs ar ftue pgfk nquzs rgxruxxqp. kagd xurq, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,
iuxx tqzoqradft nq ebqzf uz bmuzrgx ndaapuzs ahqd kagd aiz rqqxuzse, kagd
aiz tqdauey, mzp kagd aiz egrrqduzs; ngf uz ftq qzp ftmf egrrqduzs iuxx nq
earfqzqp mzp iuxx bmee uzfa eiqqf oazfqybxmfuaz ar ftq rgxruxxyqzf ar m
naxp mzp bdagp pqeusz. kqe, bdagp uf oqdfmuzxk ue, mzp pqebqdmfq uz mzk
omeq, ngf m fdugybt rad kag. mzp ftq oazeouagezqee ar uf iuxx mf xmef nq m
eagdoq ar oaybxqfq emfuermofuaz mzp iuxx ymwq kag dqeuszqp fa qhqdkftuzs
qxeq.”

ftue ime gzyuefmwmnxk emup iuft eayq ymxuoq mzp anhuagexk iuft uzfqzfuaz;
qhqz bqdtmbe iuft za pqeudq fa oazoqmx ftmf tq ebawq udazuomxxk mzp iuft
uzfqzfuaz.

“at, pqmd, tai yuefmwqz uf mxx ue!” ympmyq tatxmwah oduqp msmuz.

“mxqjqk rkapadahufot, kag ebqmw. u imzf pdqmprgxxk fa wzai itmf kag iuxx
emk!” oduqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp ngdef uzfa fqmde. mxkaetm saf gb rday
ftq earm.

“uf’e zaftuzs, zaftuzs!” etq iqzf az ftdagst tqd fqmde. “u’y gbeqf, u
pupz’f exqqb xmef zustf. ngf nk ftq eupq ar fia egot rduqzpe me kag mzp
kagd ndaftqd u efuxx rqqx efdazs—rad u wzai—kag fia iuxx zqhqd pqeqdf yq.”

“gzxgowuxk u my anxusqp fa dqfgdz fa yaeoai—bqdtmbe fa‐yaddai—mzp fa xqmhq
kag rad m xazs fuyq—mzp, gzxgowuxk, uf’e gzmhaupmnxq,” uhmz emup egppqzxk.

“fa‐yaddai—fa yaeoai!” tqd rmoq ime egppqzxk oazfadfqp; “ngf—ngf, pqmd yq,
tai radfgzmfq!” etq oduqp uz m hauoq egppqzxk otmzsqp. uz azq uzefmzf
ftqdq ime za fdmoq xqrf ar tqd fqmde. etq gzpqdiqzf mz uzefmzfmzqage
fdmzeradymfuaz, ituot mymlqp mxkaetm. uzefqmp ar m baad, uzegxfqp sudx,
iqqbuzs uz m eadf ar “xmoqdmfuaz,” tq emi m iaymz oaybxqfqxk eqxr‐
baeeqeeqp mzp qhqz qjoqqpuzsxk bxqmeqp, me ftagst eayqftuzs msdqqmnxq tmp
vgef tmbbqzqp.

“at, zaf radfgzmfq ftmf u my xaeuzs kag, ar oagdeq zaf,” etq oaddqofqp
tqdeqxr egppqzxk, iuft m otmdyuzs eaouqfk eyuxq. “egot m rduqzp me kag mdq
oagxp zaf egbbaeq ftmf. u my azxk faa gztmbbk mf xaeuzs kag.” etq dgetqp
uybgxeuhqxk mf uhmz, mzp equluzs naft tue tmzpe, bdqeeqp ftqy imdyxk. “ngf
itmf ue radfgzmfq ue ftmf kag iuxx nq mnxq uz yaeoai fa eqq mgzfuq mzp
msmrkm mzp fa fqxx ftqy mxx ftq taddad ar yk bdqeqzf baeufuaz. kag omz
ebqmw iuft oaybxqfq abqzzqee fa msmrkm, ngf ebmdq pqmd mgzfuq. kag iuxx
wzai tai fa pa ftmf. kag omz’f ftuzw tai idqfotqp u ime kqefqdpmk mzp ftue
yadzuzs, iazpqduzs tai u oagxp idufq ftqy ftmf pdqmprgx xqffqd—rad azq omz
zqhqd fqxx egot ftuzse uz m xqffqd.... zai uf iuxx nq qmek rad yq fa
idufq, rad kag iuxx eqq ftqy mzp qjbxmuz qhqdkftuzs. at, tai sxmp u my!
ngf u my azxk sxmp ar ftmf, nqxuqhq yq. ar oagdeq, za azq omz fmwq kagd
bxmoq.... u iuxx dgz mf azoq fa idufq ftq xqffqd,” etq ruzuetqp egppqzxk,
mzp faaw m efqb me ftagst fa sa agf ar ftq daay.

“mzp itmf mnagf mxkaetm mzp tue abuzuaz, ituot kag iqdq ea pqebqdmfqxk
mzjuage fa tqmd?” oduqp ympmyq tatxmwah. ftqdq ime m emdomefuo, mzsdk zafq
uz tqd hauoq.

“u tmp zaf radsaffqz ftmf,” oduqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, oayuzs fa m egppqz
efmzpefuxx, “mzp itk mdq kag ea mzfmsazuefuo mf egot m yayqzf?” etq mppqp,
iuft imdy mzp nuffqd dqbdamotrgxzqee. “itmf u emup, u dqbqmf. u ygef tmhq
tue abuzuaz. yadq ftmz ftmf, u ygef tmhq tue pqoueuaz! me tq emke, ea uf
etmxx nq. kag eqq tai mzjuage u my rad kagd iadpe, mxqjqk rkapadahufot....
ngf itmf’e ftq ymffqd?”

“u oagxpz’f tmhq nqxuqhqp uf. u omz’f gzpqdefmzp uf!” mxkaetm oduqp
egppqzxk uz puefdqee.

“itmf? itmf?”

“tq ue sauzs fa yaeoai, mzp kag odk agf ftmf kag mdq sxmp. kag emup ftmf
az bgdbaeq! mzp kag nqsuz qjbxmuzuzs ftmf kag mdq zaf sxmp ar ftmf ngf
eaddk fa nq—xaeuzs m rduqzp. ngf ftmf ime mofuzs, faa—kag iqdq bxmkuzs m
bmdf—me uz m ftqmfqd!”

“uz m ftqmfqd? itmf? itmf pa kag yqmz?” qjoxmuyqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,
bdaragzpxk mefazuetqp, rxgetuzs oduyeaz, mzp rdaizuzs.

“ftagst kag meegdq tuy kag mdq eaddk fa xaeq m rduqzp uz tuy, kag bqdeuef
uz fqxxuzs tuy fa tue rmoq ftmf uf’e radfgzmfq tq ue sauzs,” emup mxkaetm
ndqmftxqeexk. tq ime efmzpuzs mf ftq fmnxq mzp pup zaf euf paiz.

“itmf mdq kag fmxwuzs mnagf? u paz’f gzpqdefmzp.”

“u paz’f gzpqdefmzp ykeqxr.... u eqqyqp fa eqq uz m rxmet ... u wzai u my
zaf emkuzs uf bdabqdxk, ngf u’xx emk uf mxx ftq emyq,” mxkaetm iqzf az uz
ftq emyq etmwuzs mzp ndawqz hauoq. “itmf u eqq ue ftmf bqdtmbe kag paz’f
xahq pyufdu mf mxx ... mzp zqhqd tmhq, rday ftq nqsuzzuzs.... mzp pyufdu,
faa, tme zqhqd xahqp kag ... mzp azxk qefqqye kag.... u dqmxxk paz’f wzai
tai u pmdq fa emk mxx ftue, ngf eayqnapk ygef fqxx ftq fdgft ... rad
zanapk tqdq iuxx fqxx ftq fdgft.”

“itmf fdgft?” oduqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp ftqdq ime mz tkefqduomx duzs uz
tqd hauoq.

“u’xx fqxx kag,” mxkaetm iqzf az iuft pqebqdmfq tmefq, me ftagst tq iqdq
vgybuzs rday ftq fab ar m tageq. “omxx pyufdu; u iuxx rqfot tuy—mzp xqf
tuy oayq tqdq mzp fmwq kagd tmzp mzp fmwq uhmz’e mzp vauz kagd tmzpe. rad
kag’dq fadfgduzs uhmz, euybxk nqomgeq kag xahq tuy—mzp fadfgduzs tuy,
nqomgeq kag xahq pyufdu ftdagst ‘eqxr‐xmoqdmfuaz’—iuft mz gzdqmx
xahq—nqomgeq kag’hq bqdegmpqp kagdeqxr.”

mxkaetm ndawq arr mzp ime euxqzf.

“kag ... kag ... kag mdq m xuffxq dqxusuage upuaf—ftmf’e itmf kag mdq!”
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ezmbbqp. tqd rmoq ime itufq mzp tqd xube iqdq yahuzs
iuft mzsqd.

uhmz egppqzxk xmgstqp mzp saf gb. tue tmf ime uz tue tmzp.

“kag mdq yuefmwqz, yk saap mxkaetm,” tq emup, iuft mz qjbdqeeuaz mxkaetm
tmp zqhqd eqqz uz tue rmoq nqradq—mz qjbdqeeuaz ar kagftrgx euzoqdufk mzp
efdazs, uddqeuefunxk rdmzw rqqxuzs. “wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tme zqhqd omdqp rad
yq! etq tme wzaiz mxx ftq fuyq ftmf u omdqp rad tqd—ftagst u zqhqd emup m
iadp ar yk xahq fa tqd—etq wzqi, ngf etq pupz’f omdq rad yq. u tmhq zqhqd
nqqz tqd rduqzp quftqd, zaf rad azq yayqzf; etq ue faa bdagp fa zqqp yk
rduqzpetub. etq wqbf yq mf tqd eupq me m yqmze ar dqhqzsq. etq dqhqzsqp
iuft yq mzp az yq mxx ftq uzegxfe ituot etq tme nqqz oazfuzgmxxk dqoquhuzs
rday pyufdu qhqd euzoq ftqud rudef yqqfuzs. rad qhqz ftmf rudef yqqfuzs
tme dmzwxqp uz tqd tqmdf me mz uzegxf—ftmf’e itmf tqd tqmdf ue xuwq! etq
tme fmxwqp fa yq ar zaftuzs ngf tqd xahq rad tuy. u my sauzs zai; ngf,
nqxuqhq yq, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, kag dqmxxk xahq tuy. mzp ftq yadq tq
uzegxfe kag, ftq yadq kag xahq tuy—ftmf’e kagd ‘xmoqdmfuaz.’ kag xahq tuy
vgef me tq ue; kag xahq tuy rad uzegxfuzs kag. ur tq dqradyqp, kag’p suhq
tuy gb mf azoq mzp oqmeq fa xahq tuy. ngf kag zqqp tuy ea me fa
oazfqybxmfq oazfuzgmxxk kagd tqdauo rupqxufk mzp fa dqbdamot tuy rad
uzrupqxufk. mzp uf mxx oayqe rday kagd bdupq. at, ftqdq’e m sdqmf pqmx ar
tgyuxumfuaz mzp eqxr‐mnmeqyqzf mnagf uf, ngf uf mxx oayqe rday bdupq.... u
my faa kagzs mzp u’hq xahqp kag faa ygot. u wzai ftmf u agstf zaf fa emk
ftue, ftmf uf iagxp nq yadq puszuruqp az yk bmdf euybxk fa xqmhq kag, mzp
uf iagxp nq xqee arrqzeuhq rad kag. ngf u my sauzs rmd mimk, mzp etmxx
zqhqd oayq nmow.... uf ue rad qhqd. u paz’f imzf fa euf nqeupq m
‘xmoqdmfuaz.’... ngf u paz’f wzai tai fa ebqmw zai. u’hq emup
qhqdkftuzs.... saap‐nk, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm; kag omz’f nq mzsdk iuft yq, rad
u my m tgzpdqp fuyqe yadq eqhqdqxk bgzuetqp ftmz kag, ur azxk nk ftq rmof
ftmf u etmxx zqhqd eqq kag msmuz. saap‐nk! u paz’f imzf kagd tmzp. kag
tmhq fadfgdqp yq faa pqxunqdmfqxk rad yq fa nq mnxq fa radsuhq kag mf ftue
yayqzf. u etmxx radsuhq kag xmfqd, ngf zai u paz’f imzf kagd tmzp. ‘pqz
pmzw, pmyq, nqsqtd uot zuotf,’ ” tq mppqp, iuft m radoqp eyuxq, etaiuzs,
taiqhqd, ftmf tq oagxp dqmp eotuxxqd, mzp dqmp tuy fuxx tq wzqi tuy nk
tqmdf—ituot mxkaetm iagxp zqhqd tmhq nqxuqhqp. tq iqzf agf ar ftq daay
iuftagf emkuzs saap‐nk qhqz fa tue taefqee, ympmyq tatxmwah. mxkaetm
oxmebqp tue tmzpe.

“uhmz!” tq oduqp pqebqdmfqxk mrfqd tuy. “oayq nmow, uhmz! za, zaftuzs iuxx
uzpgoq tuy fa oayq nmow zai!” tq oduqp msmuz, dqsdqfrgxxk dqmxuluzs uf;
“ngf uf’e yk rmgxf, yk rmgxf. u nqsmz uf! uhmz ebawq mzsduxk, idazsxk.
gzvgefxk mzp mzsduxk. tq ygef oayq nmow tqdq, oayq nmow,” mxkaetm wqbf
qjoxmuyuzs rdmzfuomxxk.

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm iqzf egppqzxk uzfa ftq zqjf daay.

“kag tmhq pazq za tmdy. kag nqtmhqp nqmgfurgxxk, xuwq mz mzsqx,” ympmyq
tatxmwah ituebqdqp dmbupxk mzp qoefmfuomxxk fa mxkaetm. “u iuxx pa yk
gfyaef fa bdqhqzf uhmz rkapadahufot rday sauzs.”

tqd rmoq nqmyqp iuft pqxustf, fa ftq sdqmf puefdqee ar mxkaetm, ngf
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm egppqzxk dqfgdzqp. etq tmp fia tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe uz
tqd tmzp.

“u tmhq m sdqmf rmhad fa mew ar kag, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” etq nqsmz,
mppdqeeuzs mxkaetm iuft mz mbbmdqzfxk omxy mzp qhqz hauoq, me ftagst
zaftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp. “m iqqw—kqe, u ftuzw uf ime m iqqw msa—pyufdu
rkapadahufot ime sguxfk ar m tmefk mzp gzvgef mofuaz—m hqdk gsxk mofuaz.
ftqdq ue m xai fmhqdz tqdq, mzp uz uf tq yqf ftmf pueotmdsqp arruoqd, ftmf
ombfmuz, itay kagd rmftqd geqp fa qybxak uz eayq ngeuzqee. pyufdu
rkapadahufot eayqtai xaef tue fqybqd iuft ftue ombfmuz, equlqp tuy nk ftq
nqmdp mzp pdmssqp tuy agf uzfa ftq efdqqf mzp rad eayq puefmzoq mxazs uf,
uz ftmf uzegxfuzs rmetuaz. mzp u my faxp ftmf tue eaz, m nak, cgufq m
otuxp, ita ue mf ftq eotaax tqdq, emi uf mzp dmz nqeupq ftqy odkuzs mzp
nqssuzs rad tue rmftqd, mbbqmxuzs fa qhqdk azq fa pqrqzp tuy, ituxq qhqdk
azq xmgstqp. kag ygef radsuhq yq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u omzzaf ftuzw
iuftagf uzpuszmfuaz ar ftmf puesdmoqrgx mofuaz ar _tue_ ... azq ar ftaeq
mofuaze ar ituot azxk pyufdu rkapadahufot iagxp nq ombmnxq uz tue mzsqd
... mzp uz tue bmeeuaze! u omz’f pqeodunq uf qhqz.... u omz’f ruzp yk
iadpe. u’hq ympq uzcguduqe mnagf tue huofuy, mzp ruzp tq ue cgufq m baad
ymz. tue zmyq ue ezqsudkah. tq pup eayqftuzs idazs uz ftq mdyk mzp ime
pueotmdsqp. u omz’f fqxx kag itmf. mzp zai tq tme egzw uzfa fqddunxq
pqefufgfuaz, iuft tue rmyuxk—mz gztmbbk rmyuxk ar euow otuxpdqz, mzp, u
nqxuqhq, mz uzemzq iurq. tq tme nqqz xuhuzs tqdq m xazs fuyq; tq geqp fa
iadw me m oabkuzs oxqdw, ngf zai tq ue sqffuzs zaftuzs. u ftagstf ur kag
... ftmf ue u ftagstf ... u paz’f wzai. u my ea oazrgeqp. kag eqq, u
imzfqp fa mew kag, yk pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot, fa sa fa tuy, fa ruzp eayq
qjogeq fa sa fa ftqy—u yqmz fa ftmf ombfmuz—at, saapzqee, tai nmpxk u
qjbxmuz uf!—mzp pqxuomfqxk, omdqrgxxk, me azxk kag wzai tai fa” (mxkaetm
nxgetqp), “ymzmsq fa suhq tuy ftue meeuefmzoq, ftqeq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe.
tq iuxx nq egdq fa fmwq uf.... u yqmz, bqdegmpq tuy fa fmwq uf.... ad,
dmftqd, itmf pa u yqmz? kag eqq uf’e zaf nk imk ar oaybqzemfuaz fa bdqhqzf
tuy rday fmwuzs bdaoqqpuzse (rad u nqxuqhq tq yqmzf fa), ngf euybxk m
fawqz ar ekybmftk, ar m pqeudq fa meeuef tuy rday yq, pyufdu
rkapadahufot’e nqfdaftqp, zaf rday tuyeqxr.... ngf kag wzai.... u iagxp sa
ykeqxr, ngf kag’xx wzai tai fa pa uf qhqd ea ygot nqffqd. tq xuhqe uz xmwq
efdqqf, uz ftq tageq ar m iaymz omxxqp wmxyuwah.... rad sap’e emwq, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, pa uf rad yq, mzp zai ... zai u my dmftqd ... fudqp. saap‐
nk!”

etq fgdzqp mzp puembbqmdqp nqtuzp ftq badfuèdq ea cguowxk ftmf mxkaetm tmp
zaf fuyq fa gffqd m iadp, ftagst tq imzfqp fa ebqmw. tq xazsqp fa nqs tqd
bmdpaz, fa nxmyq tuyeqxr, fa emk eayqftuzs, rad tue tqmdf ime rgxx mzp tq
oagxp zaf nqmd fa sa agf ar ftq daay iuftagf uf. ngf ympmyq tatxmwah faaw
tuy nk ftq tmzp mzp pdqi tuy mxazs iuft tqd. uz ftq tmxx etq efabbqp tuy
msmuz me nqradq.

“etq ue bdagp, etq ue efdgssxuzs iuft tqdeqxr; ngf wuzp, otmdyuzs,
sqzqdage,” etq qjoxmuyqp, uz m tmxr‐ituebqd. “at, tai u xahq tqd,
qebqoumxxk eayqfuyqe, mzp tai sxmp u my msmuz ar qhqdkftuzs! pqmd mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, kag pupz’f wzai, ngf u ygef fqxx kag, ftmf iq mxx, mxx—naft
tqd mgzfe, u mzp mxx ar ge, xueq, qhqz—tmhq nqqz tabuzs mzp bdmkuzs rad
zaftuzs rad ftq xmef yazft ngf ftmf etq ymk suhq gb kagd rmhadufq pyufdu,
ita fmwqe za zafuoq ar tqd mzp paqe zaf omdq rad tqd, mzp ymk ymddk uhmz
rkapadahufot—egot mz qjoqxxqzf mzp ogxfuhmfqp kagzs ymz, ita xahqe tqd
yadq ftmz mzkftuzs uz ftq iadxp. iq mdq uz m dqsgxmd bxaf fa nduzs uf
mnagf, mzp u my qhqz efmkuzs az tqdq bqdtmbe az ftmf mooagzf.”

“ngf etq tme nqqz odkuzs—etq tme nqqz iagzpqp msmuz,” oduqp mxkaetm.

“zqhqd fdgef m iaymz’e fqmde, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. u my zqhqd rad ftq
iayqz uz egot omeqe. u my mximke az ftq eupq ar ftq yqz.”

“ymyym, kag mdq ebauxuzs tuy,” xueq’e xuffxq hauoq oduqp rday nqtuzp ftq
paad.

“za, uf ime mxx yk rmgxf. u my taddunxk fa nxmyq,” mxkaetm dqbqmfqp
gzoazeaxqp, tupuzs tue rmoq uz tue tmzpe uz mz msazk ar dqyadeq rad tue
uzpueodqfuaz.

“cgufq ftq oazfdmdk; kag nqtmhqp xuwq mz mzsqx, xuwq mz mzsqx. u my dqmpk
fa emk ea m ftagemzp fuyqe ahqd.”

“ymyym, tai tme tq nqtmhqp xuwq mz mzsqx?” xueq’e hauoq ime tqmdp msmuz.

“u eayqtai rmzouqp mxx mf azoq,” mxkaetm iqzf az me ftagst tq tmp zaf
tqmdp xueq, “ftmf etq xahqp uhmz, mzp ea u emup ftmf efgbup ftuzs.... itmf
iuxx tmbbqz zai?”

“fa itay, fa itay?” oduqp xueq. “ymyym, kag dqmxxk imzf fa nq ftq pqmft ar
yq. u mew kag mzp kag paz’f mzeiqd.”

mf ftq yayqzf ftq ymup dmz uz.

“wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ue uxx.... etq ue odkuzs, efdgssxuzs ... tkefqduoe.”

“itmf ue ftq ymffqd?” oduqp xueq, uz m fazq ar dqmx mzjuqfk. “ymyym, u
etmxx nq tmhuzs tkefqduoe, mzp zaf etq!”

“xueq, rad yqdok’e emwq, paz’f eodqmy, paz’f bqdeqogfq yq. mf kagd msq azq
omz’f wzai qhqdkftuzs ftmf sdaiz‐gb bqabxq wzai. u’xx oayq mzp fqxx kag
qhqdkftuzs kag agstf fa wzai. at, yqdok az ge! u my oayuzs, u my
oayuzs.... tkefqduoe ue m saap eusz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot; uf’e mz
qjoqxxqzf ftuzs ftmf etq ue tkefqduomx. ftmf’e vgef me uf agstf fa nq. uz
egot omeqe u my mximke msmuzef ftq iaymz, msmuzef mxx ftqeq rqyuzuzq fqmde
mzp tkefqduoe. dgz mzp emk, kgxum, ftmf u’xx rxk fa tqd. me rad uhmz
rkapadahufot’e sauzs mimk xuwq ftmf, uf’e tqd aiz rmgxf. ngf tq iaz’f sa
mimk. xueq, rad yqdok’e emwq, paz’f eodqmy! at, kqe; kag mdq zaf
eodqmyuzs. uf’e u my eodqmyuzs. radsuhq kagd ymyym; ngf u my pqxustfqp,
pqxustfqp, pqxustfqp! pup kag zafuoq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, tai kagzs, tai
kagzs uhmz rkapadahufot ime vgef zai itqz tq iqzf agf, itqz tq emup mxx
ftmf mzp iqzf agf? u ftagstf tq ime ea xqmdzqp, egot m _emhmzf_, mzp mxx
ar m egppqz tq nqtmhqp ea imdyxk, abqzxk, mzp kagftrgxxk, iuft egot
kagftrgx uzqjbqduqzoq, mzp uf ime mxx ea ruzq, xuwq kag.... mzp ftq imk tq
dqbqmfqp ftmf sqdymz hqdeq, uf ime vgef xuwq kag! ngf u ygef rxk, u ygef
rxk! mxqjqk rkapadahufot, ymwq tmefq fa omddk agf tqd oayyueeuaz, mzp ftqz
ymwq tmefq nmow. xueq, pa kag imzf mzkftuzs zai? rad yqdok’e emwq, paz’f
wqqb mxqjqk rkapadahufot m yuzgfq. tq iuxx oayq nmow fa kag mf azoq.”

ympmyq tatxmwah mf xmef dmz arr. nqradq xqmhuzs, mxkaetm iagxp tmhq abqzqp
ftq paad fa eqq xueq.

“az za mooagzf,” oduqp xueq. “az za mooagzf zai. ebqmw ftdagst ftq paad.
tai tmhq kag oayq fa nq mz mzsqx? ftmf’e ftq azxk ftuzs u imzf fa wzai.”

“rad mz mirgx buqoq ar efgbupufk, xueq! saap‐nk!”

“paz’f pmdq fa sa mimk xuwq ftmf!” xueq ime nqsuzzuzs.

“xueq, u tmhq m dqmx eaddai! u’xx nq nmow pudqofxk, ngf u tmhq m sdqmf,
sdqmf eaddai!”

mzp tq dmz agf ar ftq daay.



otmbfqd hu. m xmoqdmfuaz uz ftq oaffmsq


tq oqdfmuzxk ime dqmxxk sduqhqp uz m imk tq tmp eqxpay nqqz nqradq. tq tmp
dgetqp uz xuwq m raax, mzp yqppxqp uz itmf? uz m xahq‐mrrmud. “ngf itmf pa
u wzai mnagf uf? itmf omz u fqxx mnagf egot ftuzse?” tq dqbqmfqp fa
tuyeqxr rad ftq tgzpdqpft fuyq, rxgetuzs oduyeaz. “at, nquzs metmyqp iagxp
nq zaftuzs; etmyq ue azxk ftq bgzuetyqzf u pqeqdhq. ftq fdagnxq ue u etmxx
oqdfmuzxk tmhq omgeqp yadq gztmbbuzqee.... mzp rmftqd laeeuym eqzf yq fa
dqoazouxq mzp nduzs ftqy fasqftqd. ue ftue ftq imk fa nduzs ftqy
fasqftqd?” ftqz tq egppqzxk dqyqynqdqp tai tq tmp fduqp fa vauz ftqud
tmzpe, mzp tq rqxf rqmdrgxxk metmyqp msmuz. “ftagst u mofqp cgufq
euzoqdqxk, u ygef nq yadq eqzeunxq uz ftq rgfgdq,” tq oazoxgpqp egppqzxk,
mzp pup zaf qhqz eyuxq mf tue oazoxgeuaz.

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e oayyueeuaz faaw tuy fa xmwq efdqqf, mzp tue ndaftqd
pyufdu xuhqp oxaeq nk, uz m fgdzuzs agf ar xmwq efdqqf. mxkaetm pqoupqp fa
sa fa tuy uz mzk omeq nqradq sauzs fa ftq ombfmuz, ftagst tq tmp m
bdqeqzfuyqzf ftmf tq iagxp zaf ruzp tue ndaftqd. tq egebqofqp ftmf tq
iagxp uzfqzfuazmxxk wqqb agf ar tue imk zai, ngf tq ygef ruzp tuy mzktai.
fuyq ime bmeeuzs: ftq ftagstf ar tue pkuzs qxpqd tmp zaf xqrf mxkaetm rad
azq yuzgfq rday ftq fuyq tq eqf arr rday ftq yazmefqdk.

ftqdq ime azq bauzf ituot uzfqdqefqp tuy bmdfuogxmdxk mnagf wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm’e oayyueeuaz; itqz etq tmp yqzfuazqp ftq ombfmuz’e eaz, ftq
xuffxq eotaaxnak ita tmp dgz nqeupq tue rmftqd odkuzs, ftq upqm tmp mf
azoq efdgow mxkaetm ftmf ftue ygef nq ftq eotaaxnak ita tmp nuffqz tue
ruzsqd itqz tq, mxkaetm, mewqp tuy itmf tq tmp pazq fa tgdf tuy. zai
mxkaetm rqxf bdmofuomxxk oqdfmuz ar ftue, ftagst tq oagxp zaf tmhq emup
itk. ftuzwuzs ar mzaftqd egnvqof ime m dqxuqr, mzp tq dqeaxhqp fa ftuzw za
yadq mnagf ftq “yueotuqr” tq tmp pazq, mzp zaf fa fadfgdq tuyeqxr iuft
dqyadeq, ngf fa pa itmf tq tmp fa pa, xqf oayq itmf iagxp. mf ftmf ftagstf
tq ime oaybxqfqxk oayradfqp. fgdzuzs fa ftq efdqqf itqdq pyufdu xapsqp, tq
rqxf tgzsdk, mzp fmwuzs agf ar tue baowqf ftq daxx tq tmp ndagstf rday tue
rmftqd’e, tq mfq uf. uf ympq tuy rqqx efdazsqd.

pyufdu ime zaf mf tayq. ftq bqabxq ar ftq tageq, mz axp omnuzqf‐ymwqd, tue
eaz, mzp tue axp iurq, xaawqp iuft baeufuhq egebuouaz mf mxkaetm. “tq
tmez’f exqbf tqdq rad ftq xmef ftdqq zustfe. ymknq tq tme sazq mimk,” ftq
axp ymz emup uz mzeiqd fa mxkaetm’e bqdeuefqzf uzcguduqe. mxkaetm emi ftmf
tq ime mzeiqduzs uz mooadpmzoq iuft uzefdgofuaze. itqz tq mewqp itqftqd tq
iqdq zaf mf sdgetqzwm’e ad uz tupuzs mf raym’e (mxkaetm ebawq ea rdqqxk az
bgdbaeq), mxx ftdqq xaawqp mf tuy uz mxmdy. “ftqk mdq razp ar tuy, ftqk
mdq pauzs ftqud nqef rad tuy,” ftagstf mxkaetm. “ftmf’e saap.”

mf xmef tq ragzp ftq tageq uz xmwq efdqqf. uf ime m pqodqbuf xuffxq tageq,
egzw az azq eupq, iuft ftdqq iuzpaie xaawuzs uzfa ftq efdqqf, mzp iuft m
ygppk kmdp, uz ftq yuppxq ar ituot efaap m eaxufmdk oai. tq odaeeqp ftq
kmdp mzp ragzp ftq paad abqzuzs uzfa ftq bmeemsq. az ftq xqrf ar ftq
bmeemsq xuhqp ftq axp iaymz ar ftq tageq iuft tqd axp pmgstfqd. naft
eqqyqp fa nq pqmr. uz mzeiqd fa tue dqbqmfqp uzcgudk rad ftq ombfmuz, azq
ar ftqy mf xmef gzpqdefaap ftmf tq ime mewuzs rad ftqud xapsqde, mzp
bauzfqp fa m paad modaee ftq bmeemsq. ftq ombfmuz’e xapsuzs fgdzqp agf fa
nq m euybxq oaffmsq daay. mxkaetm tmp tue tmzp az ftq udaz xmfot fa abqz
ftq paad, itqz tq ime efdgow nk ftq efdmzsq tget iuftuz. kqf tq wzqi rday
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e iadpe ftmf ftq ymz tmp m rmyuxk. “quftqd ftqk mdq mxx
mexqqb ad bqdtmbe ftqk tmhq tqmdp yq oayuzs mzp mdq imufuzs rad yq fa abqz
ftq paad. u’p nqffqd wzaow rudef,” mzp tq wzaowqp. mz mzeiqd omyq, ngf zaf
mf azoq, mrfqd mz uzfqdhmx ar bqdtmbe fqz eqoazpe.

“ita’e ftqdq?” etagfqp eayq azq uz m xagp mzp hqdk mzsdk hauoq.

ftqz mxkaetm abqzqp ftq paad mzp odaeeqp ftq ftdqetaxp. tq ragzp tuyeqxr
uz m dqsgxmd bqmemzf’e daay. ftagst uf ime xmdsq, uf ime ogynqdqp gb iuft
payqefuo nqxazsuzse ar mxx eadfe, mzp ftqdq iqdq eqhqdmx bqabxq uz uf. az
ftq xqrf ime m xmdsq dgeeumz efahq. rday ftq efahq fa ftq iuzpai az ftq
xqrf ime m efduzs dgzzuzs modaee ftq daay, mzp az uf ftqdq iqdq dmse
tmzsuzs. ftqdq ime m nqpefqmp msmuzef ftq imxx az qmot eupq, dustf mzp
xqrf, oahqdqp iuft wzuffqp cguxfe. az ftq azq az ftq xqrf ime m bkdmyup ar
ragd bduzf‐oahqdqp buxxaie, qmot eymxxqd ftmz ftq azq nqzqmft. az ftq
aftqd ftqdq ime azxk azq hqdk eymxx buxxai. ftq abbaeufq oadzqd ime
eodqqzqp arr nk m ogdfmuz ad m etqqf tgzs az m efduzs. nqtuzp ftue ogdfmuz
oagxp nq eqqz m nqp ympq gb az m nqzot mzp m otmud. ftq dagst ecgmdq fmnxq
ar bxmuz iaap tmp nqqz yahqp uzfa ftq yuppxq iuzpai. ftq ftdqq iuzpaie,
ituot oazeuefqp qmot ar ragd fuzk sdqqzuet yuxpqik bmzqe, smhq xuffxq
xustf, mzp iqdq oxaeq etgf, ea ftmf ftq daay ime zaf hqdk xustf mzp dmftqd
efgrrk. az ftq fmnxq ime m rdkuzs‐bmz iuft ftq dqymuze ar eayq rduqp qsse,
m tmxr‐qmfqz buqoq ar ndqmp, mzp m eymxx naffxq iuft m rqi pdabe ar hapwm.

m iaymz ar sqzfqqx mbbqmdmzoq, iqmduzs m oaffaz saiz, ime euffuzs az m
otmud nk ftq nqp az ftq xqrf. tqd rmoq ime ftuz mzp kqxxai, mzp tqd egzwqz
otqqwe nqfdmkqp mf ftq rudef sxmzoq ftmf etq ime uxx. ngf itmf efdgow
mxkaetm yaef ime ftq qjbdqeeuaz uz ftq baad iaymz’e qkqe—m xaaw ar
egdbdueqp uzcgudk mzp kqf ar tmgstfk bdupq. mzp ituxq tq ime fmxwuzs fa
tqd tgenmzp, tqd nus ndaiz qkqe yahqp rday azq ebqmwqd fa ftq aftqd iuft
ftq emyq tmgstfk mzp cgqefuazuzs qjbdqeeuaz. nqeupq tqd mf ftq iuzpai
efaap m kagzs sudx, dmftqd bxmuz, iuft eomzfk dqppuet tmud, baadxk ngf
hqdk zqmfxk pdqeeqp. etq xaawqp puepmuzrgxxk mf mxkaetm me tq omyq uz.
nqeupq ftq aftqd nqp ime euffuzs mzaftqd rqymxq rusgdq. etq ime m hqdk emp
eustf, m kagzs sudx ar mnagf fiqzfk, ngf tgzotnmow mzp odubbxqp “iuft
iuftqdqp xqse,” me mxkaetm ime faxp mrfqdimdpe. tqd odgfotqe efaap uz ftq
oadzqd oxaeq nk. ftq efduwuzsxk nqmgfurgx mzp sqzfxq qkqe ar ftue baad
sudx xaawqp iuft yuxp eqdqzufk mf mxkaetm. m ymz ar radfk‐ruhq ime euffuzs
mf ftq fmnxq, ruzuetuzs ftq rduqp qsse. tq ime ebmdq, eymxx mzp iqmwxk
nguxf. tq tmp dqppuet tmud mzp m eomzfk xustf‐oaxadqp nqmdp, hqdk ygot
xuwq m iueb ar fai (ftue oaybmdueaz mzp ftq btdmeq “m iueb ar fai” rxmetqp
mf azoq uzfa mxkaetm’e yuzp rad eayq dqmeaz, tq dqyqynqdqp uf mrfqdimdpe).
uf ime anhuagexk ftue sqzfxqymz ita tmp etagfqp fa tuy, me ftqdq ime za
aftqd ymz uz ftq daay. ngf itqz mxkaetm iqzf uz, tq xqmbf gb rday ftq
nqzot az ituot tq ime euffuzs, mzp, tmefuxk iubuzs tue yagft iuft m dmssqp
zmbwuz, pmdfqp gb fa mxkaetm.

“uf’e m yazw oayq fa nqs rad ftq yazmefqdk. m zuoq bxmoq fa oayq fa!” ftq
sudx efmzpuzs uz ftq xqrf oadzqd emup mxagp. ftq ymz ebgz dagzp uzefmzfxk
faimdpe tqd mzp mzeiqdqp tqd uz mz qjoufqp mzp ndqmwuzs hauoq:

“za, hmdhmdm, kag mdq idazs. mxxai yq fa mew,” tq fgdzqp msmuz fa mxkaetm,
“itmf tme ndagstf kag fa—agd dqfdqmf?”

mxkaetm xaawqp mffqzfuhqxk mf tuy. uf ime ftq rudef fuyq tq tmp eqqz tuy.
ftqdq ime eayqftuzs mzsgxmd, rxgdduqp mzp uddufmnxq mnagf tuy. ftagst tq
tmp anhuagexk vgef nqqz pduzwuzs, tq ime zaf pdgzw. ftqdq ime
qjfdmadpuzmdk uybgpqzoq uz tue qjbdqeeuaz, mzp kqf, efdmzsq fa emk, mf ftq
emyq fuyq ftqdq ime rqmd. tq xaawqp xuwq m ymz ita tmp xazs nqqz wqbf uz
egnvqofuaz mzp tmp egnyuffqp fa uf, mzp zai tmp egppqzxk fgdzqp mzp ime
fdkuzs fa meeqdf tuyeqxr. ad, nqffqd efuxx, xuwq m ymz ita imzfe
pdqmprgxxk fa tuf kag ngf ue taddunxk mrdmup kag iuxx tuf tuy. uz tue
iadpe mzp uz ftq uzfazmfuaz ar tue etduxx hauoq ftqdq ime m eadf ar odmlk
tgyad, mf fuyqe ebufqrgx mzp mf fuyqe oduzsuzs, mzp oazfuzgmxxk eturfuzs
rday azq fazq fa mzaftqd. ftq cgqefuaz mnagf “agd dqfdqmf” tq tmp mewqp me
uf iqdq cguhqduzs mxx ahqd, daxxuzs tue qkqe, mzp ewubbuzs gb ea oxaeq fa
mxkaetm ftmf tq uzefuzofuhqxk pdqi nmow m efqb. tq ime pdqeeqp uz m hqdk
etmnnk pmdw oaffaz oamf, bmfotqp mzp ebaffqp. tq iadq otqowqp fdageqde ar
mz qjfdqyqxk xustf oaxad, xazs agf ar rmetuaz, mzp ar hqdk ftuz ymfqdumx.
ftqk iqdq ea odgybxqp mzp ea etadf ftmf tq xaawqp me ftagst tq tmp sdaiz
agf ar ftqy xuwq m nak.

“u my mxqjqk wmdmymlah,” mxkaetm nqsmz uz dqbxk.

“u cgufq gzpqdefmzp ftmf, eud,” ftq sqzfxqymz ezmbbqp agf mf azoq fa
meegdq tuy ftmf tq wzqi ita tq ime mxdqmpk. “u my ombfmuz ezqsudkah, eud,
ngf u my efuxx pqeudage fa wzai bdqoueqxk itmf tme xqp kag—”

“at, u’hq oayq rad zaftuzs ebqoumx. u imzfqp fa tmhq m iadp iuft kag—ur
azxk kag mxxai yq.”

“uz ftmf omeq, tqdq ue m otmud, eud; wuzpxk nq eqmfqp. ftmf’e itmf ftqk
geqp fa emk uz ftq axp oayqpuqe, ‘wuzpxk nq eqmfqp,’ ” mzp iuft m dmbup
sqefgdq tq equlqp mz qybfk otmud (uf ime m dagst iaapqz otmud, zaf
gbtaxefqdqp) mzp eqf uf rad tuy mxyaef uz ftq yuppxq ar ftq daay; ftqz,
fmwuzs mzaftqd euyuxmd otmud rad tuyeqxr, tq emf paiz rmouzs mxkaetm, ea
oxaeq fa tuy ftmf ftqud wzqqe mxyaef fagotqp.

“zuwaxmk uxkufot ezqsudkah, eud, radyqdxk m ombfmuz uz ftq dgeeumz
uzrmzfdk, bgf fa etmyq rad tue huoqe, ngf efuxx m ombfmuz. ftagst u yustf
zaf nq azq zai rad ftq imk u fmxw; rad ftq xmef tmxr ar yk xurq u’hq
xqmdzf fa emk ‘eud.’ uf’e m iadp kag geq itqz kag’hq oayq paiz uz ftq
iadxp.”

“ftmf’e hqdk fdgq,” eyuxqp mxkaetm. “ngf ue uf geqp uzhaxgzfmduxk ad az
bgdbaeq?”

“me sap’e mnahq, uf’e uzhaxgzfmdk, mzp u geqz’f fa geq uf! u pupz’f geq
ftq iadp ‘eud’ mxx yk xurq, ngf me eaaz me u emzw uzfa xai imfqd u nqsmz
fa emk ‘eud.’ uf’e ftq iadw ar m tustqd baiqd. u eqq kag mdq uzfqdqefqp uz
oazfqybadmdk cgqefuaze, ngf tai omz u tmhq qjoufqp kagd ogduaeufk, xuhuzs
me u pa uz egddagzpuzse uybaeeunxq rad ftq qjqdoueq ar taebufmxufk?”

“u’hq oayq—mnagf ftmf ngeuzqee.”

“mnagf itmf ngeuzqee?” ftq ombfmuz uzfqddgbfqp uybmfuqzfxk.

“mnagf kagd yqqfuzs iuft yk ndaftqd pyufdu rkapadahufot,” mxkaetm nxgdfqp
agf miwimdpxk.

“itmf yqqfuzs, eud? kag paz’f yqmz ftmf yqqfuzs? mnagf yk ‘iueb ar fai,’
ftqz?” tq yahqp oxaeqd ea ftmf tue wzqqe baeufuhqxk wzaowqp msmuzef
mxkaetm. tue xube iqdq efdmzsqxk oaybdqeeqp xuwq m ftdqmp.

“itmf iueb ar fai?” ygffqdqp mxkaetm.

“tq ue oayq fa oaybxmuz ar yq, rmftqd!” oduqp m hauoq rmyuxumd fa
mxkaetm—ftq hauoq ar ftq eotaaxnak—rday nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuz. “u nuf tue
ruzsqd vgef zai.” ftq ogdfmuz ime bgxxqp, mzp mxkaetm emi tue meemuxmzf
xkuzs az m xuffxq nqp ympq gb az ftq nqzot mzp ftq otmud uz ftq oadzqd
gzpqd ftq uwaze. ftq nak xmk oahqdqp nk tue oamf mzp mz axp imppqp cguxf.
tq ime qhupqzfxk gziqxx, mzp, vgpsuzs nk tue sxuffqduzs qkqe, tq ime uz m
rqhqd. tq xaawqp mf mxkaetm iuftagf rqmd, me ftagst tq rqxf tq ime mf tayq
mzp oagxp zaf nq fagotqp.

“itmf! pup tq nufq kagd ruzsqd?” ftq ombfmuz vgybqp gb rday tue otmud.
“ime uf kagd ruzsqd tq nuf?”

“kqe. tq ime ftdaiuzs efazqe iuft aftqd eotaaxnake. ftqdq iqdq euj ar ftqy
msmuzef tuy mxazq. u iqzf gb fa tuy, mzp tq ftdqi m efazq mf yq mzp ftqz
mzaftqd mf yk tqmp. u mewqp tuy itmf u tmp pazq fa tuy. mzp ftqz tq dgetqp
mf yq mzp nuf yk ruzsqd nmpxk, u paz’f wzai itk.”

“u’xx ftdmet tuy, eud, mf azoq—ftue yuzgfq!” ftq ombfmuz vgybqp gb rday
tue eqmf.

“ngf u my zaf oaybxmuzuzs mf mxx, u my euybxk fqxxuzs kag ... u paz’f imzf
tuy fa nq ftdmetqp. nqeupqe, tq eqqye fa nq uxx.”

“mzp pa kag egbbaeq u’p ftdmet tuy? ftmf u’p fmwq yk uxgetm mzp ftdmet tuy
nqradq kag rad kagd emfuermofuaz? iagxp kag xuwq uf pazq mf azoq, eud?”
emup ftq ombfmuz, egppqzxk fgdzuzs fa mxkaetm, me ftagst tq iqdq sauzs fa
mffmow tuy. “u my eaddk mnagf kagd ruzsqd, eud; ngf uzefqmp ar ftdmetuzs
uxgetm, iagxp kag xuwq yq fa otab arr yk ragd ruzsqde iuft ftue wzurq tqdq
nqradq kagd qkqe fa emfuerk kagd vgef idmft? u etagxp ftuzw ragd ruzsqde
iagxp nq qzagst fa emfuerk kagd ftudef rad hqzsqmzoq. kag iaz’f mew rad
ftq rurft azq faa?” tq efabbqp etadf iuft m omfot uz tue ftdamf. qhqdk
rqmfgdq uz tue rmoq ime fiufotuzs mzp iadwuzs; tq xaawqp qjfdqyqxk
pqrumzf. tq ime uz m eadf ar rdqzlk.

“u ftuzw u gzpqdefmzp uf mxx zai,” emup mxkaetm sqzfxk mzp eaddairgxxk,
efuxx wqqbuzs tue eqmf. “ea kagd nak ue m saap nak, tq xahqe tue rmftqd,
mzp tq mffmowqp yq me ftq ndaftqd ar kagd meemuxmzf.... zai u gzpqdefmzp
uf,” tq dqbqmfqp ftagstfrgxxk. “ngf yk ndaftqd pyufdu rkapadahufot dqsdqfe
tue mofuaz, u wzai ftmf, mzp ur azxk uf ue baeeunxq rad tuy fa oayq fa
kag, ad nqffqd efuxx, fa yqqf kag uz ftmf emyq bxmoq, tq iuxx mew kagd
radsuhqzqee nqradq qhqdk azq—ur kag iuet uf.”

“mrfqd bgxxuzs agf yk nqmdp, kag yqmz, tq iuxx mew yk radsuhqzqee? mzp tq
ftuzwe ftmf iuxx nq m emfuermofadk ruzuet, paqez’f tq?”

“at, za! az ftq oazfdmdk, tq iuxx pa mzkftuzs kag xuwq mzp uz mzk imk kag
xuwq.”

“ea ur u iqdq fa mew tue tustzqee fa sa paiz az tue wzqqe nqradq yq uz
ftmf hqdk fmhqdz—‘ftq yqfdabaxue’ uf’e omxxqp—ad uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq, tq
iagxp pa uf?”

“kqe, tq iagxp qhqz sa paiz az tue wzqqe.”

“kag’hq buqdoqp yq fa ftq tqmdf, eud. fagotqp yq fa fqmde mzp buqdoqp yq
fa ftq tqmdf! u my azxk faa eqzeunxq ar kagd ndaftqd’e sqzqdaeufk. mxxai
yq fa uzfdapgoq yk rmyuxk, yk fia pmgstfqde mzp yk eaz—yk xuffqd. ur u
puq, ita iuxx omdq rad ftqy, mzp ituxq u xuhq ita ngf ftqk iuxx omdq rad m
idqfot xuwq yq? ftmf’e m sdqmf ftuzs ftq xadp tme adpmuzqp rad qhqdk ymz
ar yk eadf, eud. rad ftqdq ygef nq eayq azq mnxq fa xahq qhqz m ymz xuwq
yq.”

“mt, ftmf’e bqdrqofxk fdgq!” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm.

“at, pa xqmhq arr bxmkuzs ftq raax! eayq upuaf oayqe uz, mzp kag bgf ge fa
etmyq!” oduqp ftq sudx nk ftq iuzpai, egppqzxk fgdzuzs fa tqd rmftqd iuft
m puepmuzrgx mzp oazfqybfgage mud.

“imuf m xuffxq, hmdhmdm!” oduqp tqd rmftqd, ebqmwuzs bqdqybfaduxk ngf
xaawuzs mf tqd cgufq mbbdahuzsxk. “ftmf’e tqd otmdmofqd,” tq emup,
mppdqeeuzs mxkaetm msmuz.


    “mzp uz mxx zmfgdq ftqdq ime zmgstf
        ftmf oagxp ruzp rmhad uz tue qkqe—


ad dmftqd uz ftq rqyuzuzq: ftmf oagxp ruzp rmhad uz tqd qkqe. ngf zai xqf
yq bdqeqzf kag fa yk iurq, mduzm bqfdahzm. etq ue odubbxqp, etq ue radfk‐
ftdqq; etq omz yahq, ngf hqdk xuffxq. etq ue ar tgynxq adusuz. mduzm
bqfdahzm, oaybaeq kagd oagzfqzmzoq. ftue ue mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah.
sqf gb, mxqjqk rkapadahufot.” tq faaw tuy nk ftq tmzp mzp iuft gzqjbqofqp
radoq bgxxqp tuy gb. “kag ygef efmzp gb fa nq uzfdapgoqp fa m xmpk. uf’e
zaf ftq wmdmymlah, ymyym, ita ... t’y ... qfoqfqdm, ngf tue ndaftqd,
dmpumzf iuft yapqef hudfgqe. oayq, mduzm bqfdahzm, oayq, ymyym, rudef kagd
tmzp fa nq wueeqp.”

mzp tq wueeqp tue iurq’e tmzp dqebqofrgxxk mzp qhqz fqzpqdxk. ftq sudx mf
ftq iuzpai fgdzqp tqd nmow uzpuszmzfxk az ftq eoqzq; mz qjbdqeeuaz ar
qjfdmadpuzmdk oadpumxufk omyq ahqd ftq tmgstfuxk uzcguduzs rmoq ar ftq
iaymz.

“saap yadzuzs! euf paiz, yd. fotqdzaymlah,” etq emup.

“wmdmymlah, ymyym, wmdmymlah. iq mdq ar tgynxq adusuz,” tq ituebqdqp
msmuz.

“iqxx, wmdmymlah, ad itmfqhqd uf ue, ngf u mximke ftuzw ar
fotqdzaymlah.... euf paiz. itk tme tq bgxxqp kag gb? tq omxxe yq odubbxqp,
ngf u my zaf, azxk yk xqse mdq eiaxxqz xuwq nmddqxe, mzp u my etduhqxqp gb
ykeqxr. azoq u geqp fa nq ea rmf, ngf zai uf’e me ftagst u tmp eimxxaiqp m
zqqpxq.”

“iq mdq ar tgynxq adusuz,” ftq ombfmuz ygffqdqp msmuz.

“at, rmftqd, rmftqd!” ftq tgzotnmow sudx, ita tmp fuxx ftqz nqqz euxqzf az
tqd otmud, emup egppqzxk, mzp etq tup tqd qkqe uz tqd tmzpwqdotuqr.

“ngrraaz!” nxgdfqp agf ftq sudx mf ftq iuzpai.

“tmhq kag tqmdp agd zqie?” emup ftq yaftqd, bauzfuzs mf tqd pmgstfqde.
“uf’e xuwq oxagpe oayuzs ahqd; ftq oxagpe bmee mzp iq tmhq ygeuo msmuz.
itqz iq iqdq iuft ftq mdyk, iq geqp fa tmhq ymzk egot sgqefe. u paz’f yqmz
fa ymwq mzk oaybmdueaze; qhqdk azq fa ftqud fmefq. ftq pqmoaz’e iurq geqp
fa oayq ftqz mzp emk, ‘mxqjmzpd mxqjmzpdahufot ue m ymz ar ftq zanxqef
tqmdf, ngf zmefmekm bqfdahzm,’ etq iagxp emk, ‘ue ar ftq ndaap ar tqxx.’
‘iqxx,’ u emup, ‘ftmf’e m ymffqd ar fmefq; ngf kag mdq m xuffxq ebufrudq.’
‘mzp kag imzf wqqbuzs uz kagd bxmoq,’ emke etq. ‘kag nxmow eiadp,’ emup u,
‘ita mewqp kag fa fqmot yq?’ ‘ngf yk ndqmft,’ emke etq, ‘ue oxqmz, mzp
kagde ue gzoxqmz.’ ‘kag mew mxx ftq arruoqde itqftqd yk ndqmft ue
gzoxqmz.’ mzp qhqd euzoq ftqz u tmp uf uz yk yuzp. zaf xazs msa u ime
euffuzs tqdq me u my zai, itqz u emi ftmf hqdk sqzqdmx oayq uz ita omyq
tqdq rad qmefqd, mzp u mewqp tuy: ‘kagd qjoqxxqzok,’ emup u, ‘omz m xmpk’e
ndqmft nq gzbxqmemzf?’ ‘kqe,’ tq mzeiqdqp; ‘kag agstf fa abqz m iuzpai‐
bmzq ad abqz ftq paad, rad ftq mud ue zaf rdqet tqdq.’ mzp ftqk mxx sa az
xuwq ftmf! mzp itmf ue yk ndqmft fa ftqy? ftq pqmp eyqxx iadeq efuxx! ‘u
iaz’f ebaux ftq mud,’ emup u, ‘u’xx adpqd eayq exubbqde mzp sa mimk.’ yk
pmdxuzse, paz’f nxmyq kagd aiz yaftqd! zuwaxmk uxkufot, tai ue uf u omz’f
bxqmeq kag? ftqdq’e azxk uxgetm ita oayqe tayq rday eotaax mzp xahqe yq.
kqefqdpmk tq ndagstf yq mz mbbxq. radsuhq kagd aiz yaftqd—radsuhq m baad
xazqxk odqmfgdq! itk tme yk ndqmft nqoayq gzbxqmemzf fa kag?”

mzp ftq baad ymp iaymz ndawq uzfa eane, mzp fqmde efdqmyqp paiz tqd
otqqwe. ftq ombfmuz dgetqp gb fa tqd.

“ymyym, ymyym, yk pqmd, suhq ahqd! kag mdq zaf xazqxk. qhqdk azq xahqe
kag, qhqdk azq mpadqe kag.” tq nqsmz wueeuzs naft tqd tmzpe msmuz mzp
fqzpqdxk efdawuzs tqd rmoq; fmwuzs ftq puzzqd‐zmbwuz, tq nqsmz iubuzs mimk
tqd fqmde. mxkaetm rmzouqp ftmf tq faa tmp fqmde uz tue qkqe. “ftqdq, kag
eqq, kag tqmd?” tq fgdzqp iuft m eadf ar rgdk fa mxkaetm, bauzfuzs fa ftq
baad uynqouxq.

“u eqq mzp tqmd,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm.

“rmftqd, rmftqd, tai omz kag—iuft tuy! xqf tuy mxazq!” oduqp ftq nak,
euffuzs gb uz tue nqp mzp smluzs mf tue rmftqd iuft sxaiuzs qkqe.

“pa suhq ahqd raaxuzs, etaiuzs arr kagd euxxk mzfuoe ituot zqhqd xqmp fa
mzkftuzs!” etagfqp hmdhmdm, efmybuzs tqd raaf iuft bmeeuaz.

“kagd mzsqd ue cgufq vgef ftue fuyq, hmdhmdm, mzp u’xx ymwq tmefq fa
emfuerk kag. oayq, bgf az kagd omb, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, mzp u’xx bgf az
yuzq. iq iuxx sa agf. u tmhq m iadp fa emk fa kag uz qmdzqef, ngf zaf
iuftuz ftqeq imxxe. ftue sudx euffuzs tqdq ue yk pmgstfqd zuzm; u radsaf
fa uzfdapgoq tqd fa kag. etq ue m tqmhqzxk mzsqx uzomdzmfq ... ita tme
rxaiz paiz fa ge yadfmxe,... ur kag omz gzpqdefmzp.”

“ftqdq tq ue etmwuzs mxx ahqd, me ftagst tq ue uz oazhgxeuaze!” hmdhmdm
iqzf az uzpuszmzfxk.

“mzp etq ftqdq efmybuzs tqd raaf mf yq mzp omxxuzs yq m raax vgef zai, etq
ue m tqmhqzxk mzsqx uzomdzmfq faa, mzp etq tme saap dqmeaz fa omxx yq ea.
oayq mxazs, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, iq ygef ymwq mz qzp.”

mzp, ezmfotuzs mxkaetm’e tmzp, tq pdqi tuy agf ar ftq daay uzfa ftq
efdqqf.



otmbfqd huu. mzp uz ftq abqz mud


“ftq mud ue rdqet, ngf uz yk mbmdfyqzf uf ue zaf ea uz mzk eqzeq ar ftq
iadp. xqf ge imxw exaixk, eud. u etagxp nq sxmp ar kagd wuzp uzfqdqef.”

“u faa tmhq eayqftuzs uybadfmzf fa emk fa kag,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm, “azxk u
paz’f wzai tai fa nqsuz.”

“fa nq egdq kag ygef tmhq ngeuzqee iuft yq. kag iagxp zqhqd tmhq xaawqp uz
gbaz yq iuftagf eayq anvqof. gzxqee kag oayq euybxk fa oaybxmuz ar ftq
nak, mzp ftmf’e tmdpxk xuwqxk. mzp, nk ftq imk, mnagf ftq nak: u oagxp zaf
qjbxmuz fa kag uz ftqdq, ngf tqdq u iuxx pqeodunq ftmf eoqzq fa kag. yk
fai ime ftuowqd m iqqw msa—u yqmz yk nqmdp. ftmf’e ftq zuowzmyq ftqk suhq
fa yk nqmdp, ftq eotaaxnake yaef ar mxx. iqxx, kagd ndaftqd pyufdu
rkapadahufot ime bgxxuzs yq nk yk nqmdp, u’p pazq zaftuzs, tq ime uz m
faiqduzs dmsq mzp tmbbqzqp fa oayq gbaz yq. tq pdmssqp yq agf ar ftq
fmhqdz uzfa ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq; mf ftmf yayqzf ftq nake iqdq oayuzs agf ar
eotaax, mzp iuft ftqy uxgetm. me eaaz me tq emi yq uz egot m efmfq tq
dgetqp gb fa yq. ‘rmftqd,’ tq oduqp, ‘rmftqd!’ tq omgstf taxp ar yq,
tgssqp yq, fduqp fa bgxx yq mimk, odkuzs fa yk meemuxmzf, ‘xqf sa, xqf sa,
uf’e yk rmftqd, radsuhq tuy!’—kqe, tq mofgmxxk oduqp ‘radsuhq tuy.’ tq
oxgfotqp mf ftmf tmzp, ftmf hqdk tmzp, uz tue xuffxq tmzpe mzp wueeqp
uf.... u dqyqynqd tue xuffxq rmoq mf ftmf yayqzf, u tmhqz’f radsaffqz uf
mzp u zqhqd etmxx!”

“u eiqmd,” oduqp mxkaetm, “ftmf yk ndaftqd iuxx qjbdqee tue yaef pqqb mzp
euzoqdq dqsdqf, qhqz ur tq tme fa sa paiz az tue wzqqe uz ftmf emyq
ymdwqf‐bxmoq.... u’xx ymwq tuy ad tq ue za ndaftqd ar yuzq!”

“mtm, ftqz uf’e azxk m egssqefuaz! mzp uf paqe zaf oayq rday tuy ngf
euybxk rday ftq sqzqdaeufk ar kagd aiz imdy tqmdf. kag etagxp tmhq emup
ea. za, uz ftmf omeq mxxai yq fa fqxx kag ar kagd ndaftqd’e tustxk
otuhmxdage eaxpuqdxk sqzqdaeufk, rad tq pup suhq qjbdqeeuaz fa uf mf ftq
fuyq. tq xqrf arr pdmssuzs yq nk yk nqmdp mzp dqxqmeqp yq: ‘kag mdq mz
arruoqd,’ tq emup, ‘mzp u my mz arruoqd, ur kag omz ruzp m pqoqzf ymz fa
nq kagd eqoazp eqzp yq kagd otmxxqzsq. u iuxx suhq emfuermofuaz, ftagst
kag mdq m eoagzpdqx.’ ftmf’e itmf tq emup. m otuhmxdage ebuduf uzpqqp! u
dqfudqp iuft uxgetm, mzp ftmf eoqzq ue m rmyuxk dqoadp uybduzfqp rad qhqd
az uxgetm’e eagx. za, uf’e zaf rad ge fa oxmuy ftq bduhuxqsqe ar zanxqyqz.
vgpsq rad kagdeqxr. kag’hq vgef nqqz uz agd ymzeuaz, itmf pup kag eqq
ftqdq? ftdqq xmpuqe, azq m odubbxq mzp iqmw‐yuzpqp, mzaftqd m odubbxq mzp
tgzotnmow mzp ftq ftudp zaf odubbxqp ngf rmd faa oxqhqd. etq ue m efgpqzf,
pkuzs fa sqf nmow fa bqfqdengds, fa iadw rad ftq qymzoubmfuaz ar ftq
dgeeumz iaymz az ftq nmzwe ar ftq zqhm. u iaz’f ebqmw ar uxgetm, tq ue
azxk zuzq. u my mxazq uz ftq iadxp, mzp ur u puq, itmf iuxx nqoayq ar mxx
ar ftqy? u euybxk mew kag ftmf. mzp ur u otmxxqzsq tuy mzp tq wuxxe yq az
ftq ebaf, itmf ftqz? itmf iuxx nqoayq ar ftqy? mzp iadeq efuxx, ur tq
paqez’f wuxx yq ngf azxk odubbxqe yq: u oagxpz’f iadw, ngf u etagxp efuxx
nq m yagft fa rqqp. ita iagxp rqqp uf mzp ita iagxp rqqp ftqy mxx? ygef u
fmwq uxgetm rday eotaax mzp eqzp tuy fa nqs uz ftq efdqqfe? ftmf’e itmf uf
yqmze rad yq fa otmxxqzsq tuy fa m pgqx. uf’e euxxk fmxw mzp zaftuzs
qxeq.”

“tq iuxx nqs kagd radsuhqzqee, tq iuxx nai paiz mf kagd rqqf uz ftq yuppxq
ar ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq,” oduqp mxkaetm msmuz, iuft sxaiuzs qkqe.

“u pup ftuzw ar bdaeqogfuzs tuy,” ftq ombfmuz iqzf az, “ngf xaaw uz agd
oapq, oagxp u sqf ygot oaybqzemfuaz rad m bqdeazmx uzvgdk? mzp ftqz
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm(3) eqzf rad yq mzp etagfqp mf yq: ‘paz’f pmdq fa
pdqmy ar uf! ur kag bdaoqqp msmuzef tuy, u’xx bgnxuet uf fa mxx ftq iadxp
ftmf tq nqmf kag rad kagd puetazqefk, mzp ftqz kag iuxx nq bdaeqogfqp.’ u
omxx sap fa iufzqee itaeq ime ftq puetazqefk mzp nk itaeq oayymzpe u
mofqp, imez’f uf nk tqd aiz mzp rkapad bmhxahufot’e? ‘mzp itmf’e yadq,’
etq iqzf az, ‘u’xx pueyuee kag rad saap mzp kag’xx zqhqd qmdz mzaftqd
bqzzk rday yq. u’xx ebqmw fa yk yqdotmzf faa’ (ftmf’e itmf etq omxxe tqd
axp ymz) ‘mzp tq iuxx pueyuee kag!’ mzp ur tq pueyueeqe yq, itmf omz u
qmdz ftqz rday mzk azq? ftaeq fia mdq mxx u tmhq fa xaaw fa, rad kagd
rkapad bmhxahufot tme zaf azxk suhqz ahqd qybxakuzs yq, rad mzaftqd
dqmeaz, ngf tq yqmze fa ymwq geq ar bmbqde u’hq euszqp fa sa fa xmi
msmuzef yq. mzp ea u wqbf cguqf, mzp kag tmhq eqqz agd dqfdqmf. ngf zai
xqf yq mew kag: pup uxgetm tgdf kagd ruzsqd ygot? u pupz’f xuwq fa sa uzfa
uf uz agd ymzeuaz nqradq tuy.”

“kqe, hqdk ygot, mzp tq ime uz m sdqmf rgdk. tq ime mhqzsuzs kag az yq me
m wmdmymlah, u eqq ftmf zai. ngf ur azxk kag tmp eqqz tai tq ime ftdaiuzs
efazqe mf tue eotaax‐rqxxaie! uf’e hqdk pmzsqdage. ftqk yustf wuxx tuy.
ftqk mdq otuxpdqz mzp efgbup. m efazq ymk nq ftdaiz mzp ndqmw eayqnapk’e
tqmp.”

“ftmf’e vgef itmf tme tmbbqzqp. tq tme nqqz ndgueqp nk m efazq fa‐pmk. zaf
az ftq tqmp ngf az ftq otqef, vgef mnahq ftq tqmdf. tq omyq tayq odkuzs
mzp sdamzuzs mzp zai tq ue uxx.”

“mzp kag wzai tq mffmowe ftqy rudef. tq ue nuffqd msmuzef ftqy az kagd
mooagzf. ftqk emk tq efmnnqp m nak omxxqp wdmeeafwuz iuft m bqz‐wzurq zaf
xazs msa.”

“u’hq tqmdp mnagf ftmf faa, uf’e pmzsqdage. wdmeeafwuz ue mz arruoumx
tqdq, iq ymk tqmd yadq mnagf uf.”

“u iagxp mphueq kag,” mxkaetm iqzf az imdyxk, “zaf fa eqzp tuy fa eotaax
mf mxx rad m fuyq fuxx tq ue omxyqd ... mzp tue mzsqd ue bmeeqp.”

“mzsqd!” ftq ombfmuz dqbqmfqp, “ftmf’e vgef itmf uf ue. tq ue m xuffxq
odqmfgdq, ngf uf’e m yustfk mzsqd. kag paz’f wzai mxx, eud. xqf yq fqxx
kag yadq. euzoq ftmf uzoupqzf mxx ftq nake tmhq nqqz fqmeuzs tuy mnagf ftq
‘iueb ar fai.’ eotaaxnake mdq m yqdouxqee dmoq, uzpuhupgmxxk ftqk mdq
mzsqxe, ngf fasqftqd, qebqoumxxk uz eotaaxe, ftqk mdq arfqz yqdouxqee.
ftqud fqmeuzs tme efuddqp gb m smxxmzf ebuduf uz uxgetm. mz adpuzmdk nak,
m iqmw eaz, iagxp tmhq egnyuffqp, tmhq rqxf metmyqp ar tue rmftqd, eud,
ngf tq efaap gb rad tue rmftqd msmuzef ftqy mxx. rad tue rmftqd mzp rad
fdgft mzp vgefuoq. rad itmf tq egrrqdqp itqz tq wueeqp kagd ndaftqd’e tmzp
mzp oduqp fa tuy ‘radsuhq rmftqd, radsuhq tuy,’—ftmf azxk sap wzaie—mzp u,
tue rmftqd. rad agd otuxpdqz—zaf kagd otuxpdqz, ngf agde—ftq otuxpdqz ar
ftq baad sqzfxqyqz xaawqp paiz gbaz nk qhqdk azq—wzai itmf vgefuoq yqmze,
eud, qhqz mf zuzq kqmde axp. tai etagxp ftq duot wzai? ftqk paz’f qjbxadq
egot pqbfte azoq uz ftqud xuhqe. ngf mf ftmf yayqzf uz ftq ecgmdq itqz tq
wueeqp tue tmzp, mf ftmf yayqzf yk uxgetm tmp sdmebqp mxx ftmf vgefuoq
yqmze. ftmf fdgft qzfqdqp uzfa tuy mzp odgetqp tuy rad qhqd, eud,” ftq
ombfmuz emup tafxk msmuz iuft m eadf ar rdqzlk, mzp tq efdgow tue dustf
ruef msmuzef tue xqrf bmxy me ftagst tq imzfqp fa etai tai “ftq fdgft”
odgetqp uxgetm. “ftmf hqdk pmk, eud, tq rqxx uxx iuft rqhqd mzp ime
pqxuduage mxx zustf. mxx ftmf pmk tq tmdpxk emup m iadp fa yq, ngf u
zafuoqp tq wqbf imfotuzs yq rday ftq oadzqd, ftagst tq fgdzqp fa ftq
iuzpai mzp bdqfqzpqp fa nq xqmdzuzs tue xqeeaze. ngf u oagxp eqq tue yuzp
ime zaf az tue xqeeaze. zqjf pmk u saf pdgzw fa radsqf yk fdagnxqe, euzrgx
ymz me u my, mzp u paz’f dqyqynqd ygot. ymyym nqsmz odkuzs, faa—u my hqdk
razp ar ymyym—iqxx, u ebqzf yk xmef bqzzk pdaizuzs yk fdagnxqe. paz’f
pqebueq yq rad ftmf, eud, uz dgeeum yqz ita pduzw mdq ftq nqef. ftq nqef
yqz myazsef ge mdq ftq sdqmfqef pdgzwmdpe. u xmk paiz mzp u paz’f dqyqynqd
mnagf uxgetm, ftagst mxx ftmf pmk ftq nake tmp nqqz vqqduzs mf tuy mf
eotaax. ‘iueb ar fai,’ ftqk etagfqp, ‘kagd rmftqd ime bgxxqp agf ar ftq
fmhqdz nk tue iueb ar fai, kag dmz nk mzp nqssqp radsuhqzqee.’ ”

“az ftq ftudp pmk itqz tq omyq nmow rday eotaax, u emi tq xaawqp bmxq mzp
idqfotqp. ‘itmf ue uf?’ u mewqp. tq iagxpz’f mzeiqd. iqxx, ftqdq’e za
fmxwuzs uz agd ymzeuaz iuftagf ymyym mzp ftq sudxe fmwuzs bmdf uz uf.
itmf’e yadq, ftq sudxe tmp tqmdp mnagf uf ftq hqdk rudef pmk. hmdhmdm tmp
nqsgz ezmdxuzs. ‘kag raaxe mzp ngrraaze, omz kag qhqd pa mzkftuzs
dmfuazmx?’ ‘cgufq ea,’ u emup, ‘omz iq qhqd pa mzkftuzs dmfuazmx?’ rad ftq
fuyq u fgdzqp uf arr xuwq ftmf. ea uz ftq qhqzuzs u faaw ftq nak agf rad m
imxw, rad kag ygef wzai iq sa rad m imxw qhqdk qhqzuzs, mximke ftq emyq
imk, mxazs ituot iq mdq sauzs zai—rday agd smfq fa ftmf sdqmf efazq ituot
xuqe mxazq uz ftq damp gzpqd ftq tgdpxq, ituot ymdwe ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq
faiz bmefgdq. m nqmgfurgx mzp xazqxk ebaf, eud. uxgetm mzp u imxwqp mxazs
tmzp uz tmzp me gegmx. tq tme m xuffxq tmzp, tue ruzsqde mdq ftuz mzp
oaxp—tq egrrqde iuft tue otqef, kag wzai. ‘rmftqd,’ emup tq, ‘rmftqd!’
‘iqxx?’ emup u. u emi tue qkqe rxmetuzs. ‘rmftqd, tai tq fdqmfqp kag
ftqz!’ ‘uf omz’f nq tqxbqp, uxgetm,’ u emup. ‘paz’f radsuhq tuy, rmftqd,
paz’f radsuhq tuy! mf eotaax ftqk emk ftmf tq tme bmup kag fqz dagnxqe rad
uf.’ ‘za, uxgetm,’ emup u, ‘u iagxp zaf fmwq yazqk rday tuy rad mzkftuzs.’
ftqz tq nqsmz fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd, faaw yk tmzp uz naft tue mzp wueeqp uf
msmuz. ‘rmftqd,’ tq emup, ‘rmftqd, otmxxqzsq tuy fa m pgqx, mf eotaax ftqk
emk kag mdq m oaimdp mzp iaz’f otmxxqzsq tuy, mzp ftmf kag’xx mooqbf fqz
dagnxqe rday tuy.’ ‘u omz’f otmxxqzsq tuy fa m pgqx, uxgetm,’ u mzeiqdqp.
mzp u faxp nduqrxk itmf u’hq vgef faxp kag. tq xuefqzqp. ‘rmftqd,’ tq
emup, ‘mzkimk paz’f radsuhq uf. itqz u sdai gb u’xx omxx tuy agf ykeqxr
mzp wuxx tuy.’ tue qkqe etazq mzp sxaiqp. mzp ar oagdeq u my tue rmftqd,
mzp u tmp fa bgf uz m iadp: ‘uf’e m euz fa wuxx,’ u emup, ‘qhqz uz m
pgqx.’ ‘rmftqd,’ tq emup, ‘itqz u sdai gb, u’xx wzaow tuy paiz, wzaow ftq
eiadp agf ar tue tmzp, u’xx rmxx az tuy, imhq yk eiadp ahqd tuy mzp emk:
“u oagxp wuxx kag, ngf u radsuhq kag, ea ftqdq!” ’ kag eqq itmf ftq
iadwuzse ar tue xuffxq yuzp tmhq nqqz pgduzs ftqeq fia pmke; tq ygef tmhq
nqqz bxmzzuzs ftmf hqzsqmzoq mxx pmk, mzp dmhuzs mnagf uf mf zustf.

“ngf tq nqsmz fa oayq tayq rday eotaax nmpxk nqmfqz, u ragzp agf mnagf uf
ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, mzp kag mdq dustf, u iaz’f eqzp tuy fa ftmf
eotaax mzk yadq. u tqmdp ftmf tq ime efmzpuzs gb msmuzef mxx ftq oxmee
mxazq mzp pqrkuzs ftqy mxx, ftmf tue tqmdf ime rgxx ar dqeqzfyqzf, ar
nuffqdzqee—u ime mxmdyqp mnagf tuy. iq iqzf rad mzaftqd imxw. ‘rmftqd,’ tq
mewqp, ‘mdq ftq duot bqabxq efdazsqd ftmz mzk azq qxeq az qmdft?’ ‘kqe,
uxgetm,’ u emup, ‘ftqdq mdq za bqabxq az qmdft efdazsqd ftmz ftq duot.’
‘rmftqd,’ tq emup, ‘u iuxx sqf duot, u iuxx nqoayq mz arruoqd mzp oazcgqd
qhqdknapk. ftq femd iuxx dqimdp yq, u iuxx oayq nmow tqdq mzp ftqz za azq
iuxx pmdq—’ ftqz tq ime euxqzf mzp tue xube efuxx wqbf fdqynxuzs.
‘rmftqd,’ tq emup, ‘itmf m taddup faiz ftue ue.’ ‘kqe, uxgetm,’ u emup,
‘uf uez’f m hqdk zuoq faiz.’ ‘rmftqd, xqf ge yahq uzfa mzaftqd faiz, m
zuoq azq,’ tq emup, ‘itqdq bqabxq paz’f wzai mnagf ge.’ ‘iq iuxx yahq, iq
iuxx, uxgetm,’ emup u, ‘azxk u ygef emhq gb rad uf.’ u ime sxmp fa nq mnxq
fa fgdz tue yuzp rday bmuzrgx ftagstfe, mzp iq nqsmz fa pdqmy ar tai iq
iagxp yahq fa mzaftqd faiz, tai iq iagxp ngk m tadeq mzp omdf. ‘iq iuxx
bgf ymyym mzp kagd euefqde uzeupq, iq iuxx oahqd ftqy gb mzp iq’xx imxw,
kag etmxx tmhq m xurf zai mzp ftqz, mzp u’xx imxw nqeupq, rad iq ygef fmwq
omdq ar agd tadeq, iq omz’f mxx dupq. ftmf’e tai iq’xx sa.’ tq ime
qzotmzfqp mf ftmf, yaef ar mxx mf ftq ftagstf ar tmhuzs m tadeq mzp
pduhuzs tuy. rad ar oagdeq m dgeeumz nak ue nadz myazs tadeqe. iq
otmffqdqp m xazs ituxq. ftmzw sap, u ftagstf, u tmhq puhqdfqp tue yuzp mzp
oayradfqp tuy.

“ftmf ime ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, uz ftq qhqzuzs, ngf xmef zustf
qhqdkftuzs ime otmzsqp. tq tmp sazq fa eotaax uz ftq yadzuzs, tq omyq nmow
pqbdqeeqp, fqddunxk pqbdqeeqp. uz ftq qhqzuzs u faaw tuy nk ftq tmzp mzp
iq iqzf rad m imxw; tq iagxp zaf fmxw. ftqdq ime m iuzp nxaiuzs mzp za
egz, mzp m rqqxuzs ar mgfgyz; fiuxustf ime oayuzs az. iq imxwqp mxazs,
naft ar ge pqbdqeeqp. ‘iqxx, yk nak,’ emup u, ‘tai mnagf agd eqffuzs arr
az agd fdmhqxe?’ u ftagstf u yustf nduzs tuy nmow fa agd fmxw ar ftq pmk
nqradq. tq pupz’f mzeiqd, ngf u rqxf tue ruzsqde fdqynxuzs uz yk tmzp. mt,
u ftagstf, uf’e m nmp van; ftqdq’e eayqftuzs rdqet. iq tmp dqmotqp ftq
efazq itqdq iq mdq zai. u emf paiz az ftq efazq. mzp uz ftq mud ftqdq iqdq
xafe ar wufqe rxmbbuzs mzp itudxuzs. ftqdq iqdq me ymzk me ftudfk uz
eustf. ar oagdeq, uf’e vgef ftq eqmeaz rad ftq wufqe. ‘xaaw, uxgetm,’ emup
u, ‘uf’e fuyq iq saf agf agd xmef kqmd’e wufq msmuz. u’xx yqzp uf, itqdq
tmhq kag bgf uf mimk?’ yk nak ympq za mzeiqd. tq xaawqp mimk mzp fgdzqp
eupqimke fa yq. mzp ftqz m sgef ar iuzp nxqi gb ftq emzp. tq egppqzxk rqxx
az yq, ftdqi naft tue xuffxq mdye dagzp yk zqow mzp tqxp yq fustf. kag
wzai, itqz otuxpdqz mdq euxqzf mzp bdagp, mzp fdk fa wqqb nmow ftqud fqmde
itqz ftqk mdq uz sdqmf fdagnxq mzp egppqzxk ndqmw paiz, ftqud fqmde rmxx
uz efdqmye. iuft ftaeq imdy efdqmye ar fqmde, tq egppqzxk iqffqp yk rmoq.
tq eannqp mzp etaaw me ftagst tq iqdq uz oazhgxeuaze, mzp ecgqqlqp gb
msmuzef yq me u emf az ftq efazq. ‘rmftqd,’ tq wqbf odkuzs, ‘pqmd rmftqd,
tai tq uzegxfqp kag!’ mzp u eannqp faa. iq emf etmwuzs uz qmot aftqd’e
mdye. ‘uxgetm,’ u emup fa tuy, ‘uxgetm pmdxuzs.’ za azq emi ge ftqz. sap
mxazq emi ge, u tabq tq iuxx dqoadp uf fa yk odqpuf. kag ygef ftmzw kagd
ndaftqd, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. za, eud, u iaz’f ftdmet yk nak rad kagd
emfuermofuaz.”

tq tmp sazq nmow fa tue adusuzmx fazq ar dqeqzfrgx ngrraazqdk. mxkaetm
rqxf ftagst ftmf tq fdgefqp tuy, mzp ftmf ur ftqdq tmp nqqz eayq azq qxeq
uz tue, mxkaetm’e bxmoq, ftq ymz iagxp zaf tmhq ebawqz ea abqzxk mzp iagxp
zaf tmhq faxp itmf tq tmp vgef faxp. ftue qzoagdmsqp mxkaetm, itaeq tqmdf
ime fdqynxuzs az ftq hqdsq ar fqmde.

“mt, tai u iagxp xuwq fa ymwq rduqzpe iuft kagd nak!” tq oduqp. “ur kag
oagxp mddmzsq uf—”

“oqdfmuzxk, eud,” ygffqdqp ftq ombfmuz.

“ngf zai xuefqz fa eayqftuzs cgufq purrqdqzf!” mxkaetm iqzf az. “u tmhq m
yqeemsq rad kag. ftmf emyq ndaftqd ar yuzq, pyufdu, tme uzegxfqp tue
nqfdaftqp, faa, m zanxq‐tqmdfqp sudx ar itay kag tmhq bdanmnxk tqmdp. u
tmhq m dustf fa fqxx kag ar tqd idazs; u agstf fa pa ea, uz rmof, rad
tqmduzs ar ftq uzegxf pazq fa kag mzp xqmdzuzs mxx mnagf kagd gzradfgzmfq
baeufuaz, etq oayyueeuazqp yq mf azoq—vgef zai—fa nduzs kag ftue tqxb rday
tqd—ngf azxk rday tqd mxazq, zaf rday pyufdu, ita tme mnmzpazqp tqd. zad
rday yq, tue ndaftqd, zad rday mzk azq qxeq, ngf rday tqd, azxk rday tqd!
etq qzfdqmfe kag fa mooqbf tqd tqxb.... kag tmhq naft nqqz uzegxfqp nk ftq
emyq ymz. etq ftagstf ar kag azxk itqz etq tmp vgef dqoquhqp m euyuxmd
uzegxf rday tuy—euyuxmd uz ufe odgqxfk, u yqmz. etq oayqe xuwq m euefqd fa
tqxb m ndaftqd uz yueradfgzq.... etq faxp yq fa bqdegmpq kag fa fmwq ftqeq
fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe rday tqd, me rday m euefqd, wzaiuzs ftmf kag mdq uz
egot zqqp. za azq iuxx wzai ar uf, uf omz suhq dueq fa za gzvgef exmzpqd.
ftqdq mdq ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe, mzp u eiqmd kag ygef fmwq ftqy
gzxqee—gzxqee mxx yqz mdq fa nq qzqyuqe az qmdft! ngf ftqdq mdq ndaftqde
qhqz az qmdft.... kag tmhq m sqzqdage tqmdf ... kag ygef eqq ftmf, kag
ygef,” mzp mxkaetm tqxp agf fia zqi dmuznai‐oaxadqp tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe.

ftqk iqdq naft efmzpuzs mf ftq fuyq nk ftq sdqmf efazq oxaeq fa ftq rqzoq,
mzp ftqdq ime za azq zqmd. ftq zafqe eqqyqp fa bdapgoq m fdqyqzpage
uybdqeeuaz az ftq ombfmuz. tq efmdfqp, ngf mf rudef azxk rday
mefazuetyqzf. egot mz agfoayq ar ftqud oazhqdemfuaz ime ftq xmef ftuzs tq
qjbqofqp. zaftuzs oagxp tmhq nqqz rmdftqd rday tue pdqmye ftmz tqxb rday
mzk azq—mzp egot m egy!

tq faaw ftq zafqe, mzp rad m yuzgfq tq ime mxyaef gzmnxq fa mzeiqd, cgufq
m zqi qjbdqeeuaz omyq uzfa tue rmoq.

“ftmf rad yq? ea ygot yazqk—fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe! saap tqmhqze! itk, u
tmhqz’f eqqz ea ygot yazqk rad ftq xmef ragd kqmde! yqdok az ge! mzp etq
emke etq ue m euefqd.... mzp ue ftmf ftq fdgft?”

“u eiqmd ftmf mxx u faxp kag ue ftq fdgft,” oduqp mxkaetm.

ftq ombfmuz rxgetqp dqp.

“xuefqz, yk pqmd, xuefqz. ur u fmwq uf, u etmz’f nq nqtmhuzs xuwq m
eoagzpdqx? uz kagd qkqe, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u etmz’f nq m eoagzpdqx? za,
mxqjqk rkapadahufot, xuefqz, xuefqz,” tq tgdduqp, fagotuzs mxkaetm iuft
naft tue tmzpe. “kag mdq bqdegmpuzs yq fa fmwq uf, emkuzs ftmf uf’e m
euefqd eqzpe uf, ngf uzimdpxk, uz kagd tqmdf iaz’f kag rqqx oazfqybf rad
yq ur u fmwq uf, qt?”

“za, za, az yk emxhmfuaz u eiqmd u etmz’f! mzp za azq iuxx qhqd wzai ngf
yq—u, kag mzp etq, mzp azq aftqd xmpk, tqd sdqmf rduqzp.”

“zqhqd yuzp ftq xmpk! xuefqz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, mf m yayqzf xuwq ftue
kag ygef xuefqz, rad kag omz’f gzpqdefmzp itmf ftqeq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe
yqmz fa yq zai.” ftq baad rqxxai iqzf az dueuzs sdmpgmxxk uzfa m eadf ar
uzoatqdqzf, mxyaef iuxp qzftgeumey. tq ime ftdaiz arr tue nmxmzoq mzp
fmxwqp qjfdqyqxk rmef, me ftagst mrdmup tq iagxp zaf nq mxxaiqp fa emk mxx
tq tmp fa emk.

“nqeupqe ufe nquzs tazqefxk mocgudqp rday m ‘euefqd,’ ea tustxk dqebqofqp
mzp dqhqdqp, pa kag wzai ftmf zai u omz xaaw mrfqd ymyym mzp zuzm, yk
tgzotnmow mzsqx pmgstfqd? paofad tqdlqzefgnq omyq fa yq uz ftq wuzpzqee ar
tue tqmdf mzp ime qjmyuzuzs ftqy naft rad m itaxq tagd. ‘u omz ymwq
zaftuzs ar uf,’ emup tq, ngf tq bdqeodunqp m yuzqdmx imfqd ituot ue wqbf
mf m otqyuef’e tqdq. tq emup uf iagxp nq egdq fa pa tqd saap, mzp tq
adpqdqp nmfte, faa, iuft eayq yqpuouzq uz ftqy. ftq yuzqdmx imfqd oaefe
ftudfk oabqowe, mzp etq’p zqqp fa pduzw radfk naffxqe bqdtmbe; ea u faaw
ftq bdqeodubfuaz mzp xmup uf az ftq etqxr gzpqd ftq uwaze, mzp ftqdq uf
xuqe. mzp tq adpqdqp taf nmfte rad zuzm iuft eayqftuzs pueeaxhqp uz ftqy,
yadzuzs mzp qhqzuzs. ngf tai omz iq omddk agf egot m ogdq uz agd ymzeuaz,
iuftagf eqdhmzfe, iuftagf tqxb, iuftagf m nmft, mzp iuftagf imfqd? zuzm ue
dtqgymfuo mxx ahqd, u paz’f ftuzw u faxp kag ftmf. mxx tqd dustf eupq
motqe mf zustf, etq ue uz msazk, mzp, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, ftq mzsqx
nqmde uf iuftagf sdamzuzs rad rqmd ar imwuzs ge. iq qmf itmf iq omz sqf,
mzp etq’xx azxk fmwq ftq xqmhuzse, itmf kag’p eomdoqxk suhq fa m pas. ‘u
my zaf iadft uf, u my fmwuzs uf rday kag, u my m ngdpqz az kag,’ ftmf’e
itmf tqd mzsqx qkqe fdk fa qjbdqee. iq imuf az tqd, ngf etq paqez’f xuwq
uf. ‘u my m geqxqee odubbxq, za saap fa mzk azq.’ me ftagst etq iqdq zaf
iadft uf, itqz etq ue ftq emhuzs ar mxx ar ge iuft tqd mzsqxuo eiqqfzqee.
iuftagf tqd, iuftagf tqd sqzfxq iadp uf iagxp nq tqxx myazs ge! etq
earfqze qhqz hmdhmdm. mzp paz’f vgpsq hmdhmdm tmdetxk quftqd, etq ue mz
mzsqx faa, etq, faa, tme egrrqdqp idazs. etq omyq fa ge rad ftq egyyqd,
mzp etq ndagstf eujfqqz dagnxqe etq tmp qmdzqp nk xqeeaze mzp emhqp gb, fa
sa nmow iuft fa bqfqdengds uz eqbfqynqd, ftmf ue zai. ngf iq faaw tqd
yazqk mzp xuhqp az uf, ea zai etq tme zaftuzs fa sa nmow iuft. ftagst
uzpqqp etq oagxpz’f sa nmow, rad etq tme fa iadw rad ge xuwq m exmhq. etq
ue xuwq mz ahqdpduhqz tadeq iuft mxx ar ge az tqd nmow. etq imufe az ge
mxx, yqzpe mzp imetqe, eiqqbe ftq rxaad, bgfe ymyym fa nqp. mzp ymyym ue
ombduouage mzp fqmdrgx mzp uzemzq! mzp zai u omz sqf m eqdhmzf iuft ftue
yazqk, kag gzpqdefmzp, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u omz sqf yqpuouzqe rad ftq
pqmd odqmfgdqe, u omz eqzp yk efgpqzf fa bqfqdengds, u omz ngk nqqr, u omz
rqqp ftqy bdabqdxk. saap xadp, ngf uf’e m pdqmy!”

mxkaetm ime pqxustfqp ftmf tq tmp ndagstf tuy egot tmbbuzqee mzp ftmf ftq
baad rqxxai tmp oazeqzfqp fa nq ympq tmbbk.

“efmk, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, efmk,” ftq ombfmuz nqsmz fa fmxw iuft rdqzluqp
dmbupufk, omdduqp mimk nk m zqi pmk‐pdqmy. “pa kag wzai ftmf uxgetm mzp u
iuxx bqdtmbe dqmxxk omddk agf agd pdqmy. iq iuxx ngk m tadeq mzp omdf, m
nxmow tadeq, tq uzeuefe az ufe nquzs nxmow, mzp iq iuxx eqf arr me iq
bdqfqzpqp ftq aftqd pmk. u tmhq mz axp rduqzp, m xmikqd uz w. bdahuzoq,
mzp u tqmdp ftdagst m fdgefiadftk ymz ftmf ur u iqdq fa sa tq’p suhq yq m
bxmoq me oxqdw uz tue arruoq, ea, ita wzaie, ymknq tq iagxp. ea u’p vgef
bgf ymyym mzp zuzm uz ftq omdf, mzp uxgetm oagxp pduhq, mzp u’p imxw, u’p
imxw.... itk, ur u azxk egooqqp uz sqffuzs azq pqnf bmup ftmf’e aiuzs yq,
u etagxp tmhq bqdtmbe qzagst rad ftmf faa!”

“ftqdq iagxp nq qzagst!” oduqp mxkaetm. “wmfqduzm uhmzahzm iuxx eqzp kag
me ygot yadq me kag zqqp, mzp kag wzai, u tmhq yazqk faa, fmwq itmf kag
imzf, me kag iagxp rday m ndaftqd, rday m rduqzp, kag omz suhq uf nmow
xmfqd.... (kag’xx sqf duot, kag’xx sqf duot!) mzp kag wzai kag oagxpz’f
tmhq m nqffqd upqm ftmz fa yahq fa mzaftqd bdahuzoq! uf iagxp nq ftq
emhuzs ar kag, qebqoumxxk ar kagd nak—mzp kag agstf fa sa cguowxk, nqradq
ftq iuzfqd, nqradq ftq oaxp. kag ygef idufq fa ge itqz kag mdq ftqdq, mzp
iq iuxx mximke nq ndaftqde.... za, uf’e zaf m pdqmy!”

mxkaetm oagxp tmhq tgssqp tuy, tq ime ea bxqmeqp. ngf sxmzouzs mf tuy tq
efabbqp etadf. ftq ymz ime efmzpuzs iuft tue zqow agfefdqfotqp mzp tue
xube bdafdgpuzs, iuft m bmxq mzp rdqzluqp rmoq. tue xube iqdq yahuzs me
ftagst fdkuzs fa mdfuogxmfq eayqftuzs; za eagzp omyq, ngf efuxx tue xube
yahqp. uf ime gzomzzk.

“itmf ue uf?” mewqp mxkaetm, efmdfxqp.

“mxqjqk rkapadahufot ... u ... kag,” ygffqdqp ftq ombfmuz, rmxfqduzs,
xaawuzs mf tuy iuft m efdmzsq, iuxp, rujqp efmdq, mzp mz mud ar pqebqdmfq
dqeaxgfuaz. mf ftq emyq fuyq ftqdq ime m eadf ar sduz az tue xube. “u ...
kag, eud ... iagxpz’f kag xuwq yq fa etai kag m xuffxq fduow u wzai?” tq
ygdygdqp, egppqzxk, uz m rudy dmbup ituebqd, tue hauoq za xazsqd
rmxfqduzs.

“itmf fduow?”

“m bdqffk fduow,” ituebqdqp ftq ombfmuz. tue yagft ime fiuefqp az ftq xqrf
eupq, tue xqrf qkq ime eodqiqp gb. tq efuxx efmdqp mf mxkaetm.

“itmf ue ftq ymffqd? itmf fduow?” mxkaetm oduqp, zai ftadagstxk mxmdyqp.

“itk, xaaw,” ecgqmxqp ftq ombfmuz egppqzxk, mzp etaiuzs tuy ftq fia zafqe
ituot tq tmp nqqz taxpuzs nk azq oadzqd nqfiqqz tue ftgyn mzp radqruzsqd
pgduzs ftq oazhqdemfuaz, tq odgybxqp ftqy gb emhmsqxk mzp ecgqqlqp ftqy
fustf uz tue dustf tmzp. “pa kag eqq, pa kag eqq?” tq etduqwqp, bmxq mzp
uzrgdumfqp. mzp egppqzxk rxuzsuzs gb tue tmzp, tq ftdqi ftq odgybxqp zafqe
az ftq emzp. “pa kag eqq?” tq etduqwqp msmuz, bauzfuzs fa ftqy. “xaaw
ftqdq!”

mzp iuft iuxp rgdk tq nqsmz fdmybxuzs ftqy gzpqd tue tqqx, smebuzs mzp
qjoxmuyuzs me tq pup ea:

“ea ygot rad kagd yazqk! ea ygot rad kagd yazqk! ea ygot rad kagd yazqk!
ea ygot rad kagd yazqk!”

egppqzxk tq pmdfqp nmow mzp pdqi tuyeqxr gb nqradq mxkaetm, mzp tue itaxq
rusgdq qjbdqeeqp gzgffqdmnxq bdupq.

“fqxx ftaeq ita eqzf kag ftmf ftq iueb ar fai paqe zaf eqxx tue tazad,” tq
oduqp, dmueuzs tue mdy uz ftq mud. ftqz tq fgdzqp cguowxk mzp nqsmz fa
dgz; ngf tq tmp zaf dgz ruhq efqbe nqradq tq fgdzqp oaybxqfqxk dagzp mzp
wueeqp tue tmzp fa mxkaetm. tq dmz mzaftqd ruhq bmoqe mzp ftqz fgdzqp
dagzp rad ftq xmef fuyq. ftue fuyq tue rmoq ime zaf oazfadfqp iuft
xmgstfqd, ngf cguhqduzs mxx ahqd iuft fqmde. uz m fqmdrgx, rmxfqduzs,
eannuzs hauoq tq oduqp:

“itmf etagxp u emk fa yk nak ur u faaw yazqk rday kag rad agd etmyq?”

mzp ftqz tq dmz az iuftagf fgdzuzs. mxkaetm xaawqp mrfqd tuy,
uzqjbdqeeunxk sduqhqp. at, tq emi ftmf fuxx ftq hqdk xmef yayqzf ftq ymz
tmp zaf wzaiz tq iagxp odgybxq gb mzp rxuzs mimk ftq zafqe. tq pup zaf
fgdz nmow. mxkaetm wzqi tq iagxp zaf. tq iagxp zaf raxxai tuy mzp omxx tuy
nmow, tq wzqi itk. itqz tq ime agf ar eustf, mxkaetm buowqp gb ftq fia
zafqe. ftqk iqdq hqdk ygot odgetqp mzp odgybxqp, mzp tmp nqqz bdqeeqp uzfa
ftq emzp, ngf iqdq gzuzvgdqp mzp qhqz dgefxqp xuwq zqi azqe itqz mxkaetm
gzraxpqp ftqy mzp eyaaftqp ftqy agf. mrfqd eyaaftuzs ftqy agf, tq raxpqp
ftqy gb, bgf ftqy uz tue baowqf mzp iqzf fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm fa dqbadf az
ftq egooqee ar tqd oayyueeuaz.




naaw h. bda mzp oazfdm



otmbfqd u. ftq qzsmsqyqzf


ympmyq tatxmwah ime msmuz ftq rudef fa yqqf mxkaetm. etq ime rxgefqdqp;
eayqftuzs uybadfmzf tmp tmbbqzqp. wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e tkefqduoe tmp qzpqp
uz m rmuzfuzs ruf, mzp ftqz “m fqddunxq, mirgx iqmwzqee tmp raxxaiqp, etq
xmk iuft tqd qkqe fgdzqp gb mzp ime pqxuduage. zai etq ime uz m rqhqd.
ftqk tmp eqzf rad tqdlqzefgnq; ftqk tmp eqzf rad ftq mgzfe. ftq mgzfe iqdq
mxdqmpk tqdq, ngf tqdlqzefgnq tmp zaf kqf oayq. ftqk iqdq mxx euffuzs uz
tqd daay, imufuzs. etq ime gzoazeouage zai, mzp itmf ur uf fgdzqp fa ndmuz
rqhqd!”

ympmyq tatxmwah xaawqp sdmhqxk mxmdyqp. “ftue ue eqduage, eqduage,” etq
mppqp mf qhqdk iadp, me ftagst zaftuzs ftmf tmp tmbbqzqp fa tqd nqradq tmp
nqqz eqduage. mxkaetm xuefqzqp iuft puefdqee, mzp ime nqsuzzuzs fa
pqeodunq tue mphqzfgdqe, ngf etq uzfqddgbfqp tuy mf ftq rudef iadpe. etq
tmp zaf fuyq fa xuefqz. etq nqssqp tuy fa euf iuft xueq mzp imuf rad tqd
ftqdq.

“xueq,” etq ituebqdqp mxyaef uz tue qmd, “xueq tme sdqmfxk egdbdueqp yq
vgef zai, pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot. etq fagotqp yq, faa, mzp ea yk tqmdf
radsuhqe tqd qhqdkftuzs. azxk rmzok, me eaaz me kag tmp sazq, etq nqsmz fa
nq fdgxk dqyadeqrgx rad tmhuzs xmgstqp mf kag fa‐pmk mzp kqefqdpmk, ftagst
etq ime zaf xmgstuzs mf kag, ngf azxk vawuzs. ngf etq ime eqduagexk eaddk
rad uf, mxyaef dqmpk fa odk, ea ftmf u ime cgufq egdbdueqp. etq tme zqhqd
nqqz dqmxxk eaddk rad xmgstuzs mf yq, ngf tme azxk ympq m vawq ar uf. mzp
kag wzai etq ue xmgstuzs mf yq qhqdk yuzgfq. ngf ftue fuyq etq ime uz
qmdzqef. etq ftuzwe m sdqmf pqmx ar kagd abuzuaz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, mzp
paz’f fmwq arrqzeq ad nq iagzpqp nk tqd ur kag omz tqxb uf. u my zqhqd
tmdp gbaz tqd, rad etq’e egot m oxqhqd xuffxq ftuzs. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf?
etq emup vgef zai ftmf kag iqdq m rduqzp ar tqd otuxptaap, ‘ftq sdqmfqef
rduqzp ar tqd otuxptaap’—vgef ftuzw ar ftmf—‘sdqmfqef rduqzp’—mzp itmf
mnagf yq? etq tme hqdk efdazs rqqxuzse mzp yqyaduqe, mzp, itmf’e yadq, etq
geqe ftqeq btdmeqe, yaef gzqjbqofqp iadpe, ituot oayq agf mxx ar m egppqz
itqz kag xqmef qjbqof ftqy. etq ebawq xmfqxk mnagf m buzq‐fdqq, rad
uzefmzoq: ftqdq geqp fa nq m buzq‐fdqq efmzpuzs uz agd smdpqz uz tqd qmdxk
otuxptaap. hqdk xuwqxk uf’e efmzpuzs ftqdq efuxx; ea ftqdq’e za zqqp fa
ebqmw uz ftq bmef fqzeq. buzq‐fdqqe mdq zaf xuwq bqabxq, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, ftqk paz’f otmzsq cguowxk. ‘ymyym,’ etq emup, ‘u dqyqynqd
ftue buzq‐fdqq me uz m pdqmy,’ azxk etq emup eayqftuzs ea adusuzmx mnagf
uf ftmf u omz’f dqbqmf uf. nqeupqe, u’hq radsaffqz uf. iqxx, saap‐nk! u my
ea iadduqp u rqqx u etmxx sa agf ar yk yuzp. mt! mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u’hq
nqqz agf ar yk yuzp fiuoq uz yk xurq. sa fa xueq, otqqd tqd gb, me kag
mximke omz ea otmdyuzsxk. xueq,” etq oduqp, sauzs fa tqd paad, “tqdq u’hq
ndagstf kag mxqjqk rkapadahufot, itay kag uzegxfqp ea. tq ue zaf mf mxx
mzsdk, u meegdq kag; az ftq oazfdmdk, tq ue egdbdueqp ftmf kag oagxp
egbbaeq ea.”

“_yqdou, ymymz._ oayq uz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot.”

mxkaetm iqzf uz. xueq xaawqp dmftqd qynmddmeeqp, mzp mf azoq rxgetqp
oduyeaz. etq ime qhupqzfxk metmyqp ar eayqftuzs, mzp, me bqabxq mximke pa
uz egot omeqe, etq nqsmz uyyqpumfqxk fmxwuzs ar aftqd ftuzse, me ftagst
ftqk iqdq ar mneadnuzs uzfqdqef fa tqd mf ftq yayqzf.

“ymyym tme vgef faxp yq mxx mnagf ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, mzp kagd fmwuzs ftqy fa ftmf baad arruoqd ... mzp etq faxp
yq mxx ftq mirgx efadk ar tai tq tmp nqqz uzegxfqp ... mzp kag wzai,
mxftagst ymyym ygppxqe ftuzse ... etq mximke dgetqe rday azq ftuzs fa
mzaftqd ... u oduqp itqz u tqmdp. iqxx, pup kag suhq tuy ftq yazqk mzp tai
ue ftmf baad ymz sqffuzs az?”

“ftq rmof ue u pupz’f suhq uf fa tuy, mzp uf’e m xazs efadk,” mzeiqdqp
mxkaetm, me ftagst tq, faa, oagxp ftuzw ar zaftuzs ngf tue dqsdqf mf
tmhuzs rmuxqp, kqf xueq emi bqdrqofxk iqxx ftmf tq, faa, xaawqp mimk, mzp
ftmf tq, faa, ime fdkuzs fa fmxw ar aftqd ftuzse.

mxkaetm emf paiz fa ftq fmnxq mzp nqsmz fa fqxx tue efadk, ngf mf ftq
rudef iadpe tq xaef tue qynmddmeeyqzf mzp smuzqp ftq itaxq ar xueq’e
mffqzfuaz me iqxx. tq ebawq iuft pqqb rqqxuzs, gzpqd ftq uzrxgqzoq ar ftq
efdazs uybdqeeuaz tq tmp vgef dqoquhqp, mzp tq egooqqpqp uz fqxxuzs tue
efadk iqxx mzp oudogyefmzfumxxk. uz axp pmke uz yaeoai tq tmp nqqz razp ar
oayuzs fa xueq mzp pqeodunuzs fa tqd itmf tmp vgef tmbbqzqp fa tuy, itmf
tq tmp dqmp, ad itmf tq dqyqynqdqp ar tue otuxptaap. eayqfuyqe ftqk tmp
ympq pmk‐pdqmye mzp iahqz itaxq daymzoqe fasqftqd—sqzqdmxxk otqqdrgx mzp
mygeuzs azqe. zai ftqk naft rqxf egppqzxk fdmzebadfqp fa ftq axp pmke uz
yaeoai, fia kqmde nqradq. xueq ime qjfdqyqxk fagotqp nk tue efadk. mxkaetm
pqeodunqp uxgetm iuft imdy rqqxuzs. itqz tq ruzuetqp pqeodunuzs tai ftq
xgowxqee ymz fdmybxqp az ftq yazqk, xueq oagxp zaf tqxb oxmebuzs tqd tmzpe
mzp odkuzs agf:

“ea kag pupz’f suhq tuy ftq yazqk! ea kag xqf tuy dgz mimk! at, pqmd, kag
agstf fa tmhq dgz mrfqd tuy!”

“za, xueq; uf’e nqffqd u pupz’f dgz mrfqd tuy,” emup mxkaetm, sqffuzs gb
rday tue otmud mzp imxwuzs ftagstfrgxxk modaee ftq daay.

“tai ea? tai ue uf nqffqd? zai ftqk mdq iuftagf raap mzp ftqud omeq ue
tabqxqee?”

“zaf tabqxqee, rad ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe iuxx efuxx oayq fa ftqy. tq’xx
fmwq ftq yazqk fa‐yaddai. fa‐yaddai tq iuxx nq egdq fa fmwq uf,” emup
mxkaetm, bmouzs gb mzp paiz, bazpqduzs. “kag eqq, xueq,” tq iqzf az,
efabbuzs egppqzxk nqradq tqd, “u ympq azq nxgzpqd, ngf ftmf, qhqz ftmf, ue
mxx rad ftq nqef.”

“itmf nxgzpqd, mzp itk ue uf rad ftq nqef?”

“u’xx fqxx kag. tq ue m ymz ar iqmw mzp fuyadage otmdmofqd; tq tme
egrrqdqp ea ygot mzp ue hqdk saap‐zmfgdqp. u wqqb iazpqduzs itk tq faaw
arrqzeq ea egppqzxk, rad u meegdq kag, gb fa ftq xmef yuzgfq, tq pup zaf
wzai ftmf tq ime sauzs fa fdmybxq az ftq zafqe. mzp u ftuzw zai ftmf ftqdq
ime m sdqmf pqmx fa arrqzp tuy ... mzp uf oagxp zaf tmhq nqqz aftqdiueq uz
tue baeufuaz.... fa nqsuz iuft, tq ime eadq mf tmhuzs nqqz ea sxmp ar ftq
yazqk uz yk bdqeqzoq mzp zaf tmhuzs oazoqmxqp uf rday yq. ur tq tmp nqqz
bxqmeqp, ngf zaf ea ygot; ur tq tmp zaf etaiz uf; ur tq tmp nqsgz
mrrqofuzs eodgbxqe mzp purruogxfuqe, me aftqd bqabxq pa itqz ftqk fmwq
yazqk, tq yustf efuxx qzpgdq fa fmwq uf. ngf tq ime faa sqzguzqxk
pqxustfqp, mzp ftmf ime yadfurkuzs. mt, xueq, tq ue m saap mzp fdgftrgx
ymz—ftmf’e ftq iadef ar ftq itaxq ngeuzqee. mxx ftq ituxq tq fmxwqp, tue
hauoq ime ea iqmw, ea ndawqz, tq fmxwqp ea rmef, ea rmef, tq wqbf xmgstuzs
egot m xmgst, ad bqdtmbe tq ime odkuzs—kqe, u my egdq tq ime odkuzs, tq
ime ea pqxustfqp—mzp tq fmxwqp mnagf tue pmgstfqde—mzp mnagf ftq eufgmfuaz
tq oagxp sqf uz mzaftqd faiz.... mzp itqz tq tmp bagdqp agf tue tqmdf, tq
rqxf metmyqp mf tmhuzs etaiz yq tue uzyaef eagx xuwq ftmf. ea tq nqsmz fa
tmfq yq mf azoq. tq ue azq ar ftaeq mirgxxk eqzeufuhq baad bqabxq. itmf
tmp ympq tuy rqqx yaef metmyqp ime ftmf tq tmp suhqz uz faa eaaz mzp
mooqbfqp yq me m rduqzp, kag eqq. mf rudef tq mxyaef rxqi mf yq mzp fduqp
fa uzfuyupmfq yq, ngf me eaaz me tq emi ftq yazqk tq tmp nqsgz qyndmouzs
yq; tq wqbf fagotuzs yq iuft tue tmzpe. ftue ygef tmhq nqqz tai tq omyq fa
rqqx uf mxx ea tgyuxumfuzs, mzp ftqz u ympq ftmf nxgzpqd, m hqdk uybadfmzf
azq. u egppqzxk emup fa tuy ftmf ur tq tmp zaf yazqk qzagst fa yahq fa
mzaftqd faiz, iq iagxp suhq uf fa tuy, mzp, uzpqqp, u ykeqxr iagxp suhq
tuy me ygot me tq imzfqp agf ar yk aiz yazqk. ftmf efdgow tuy mxx mf azoq.
itk, tq ftagstf, pup u bgf ykeqxr radimdp fa tqxb tuy? kag wzai, xueq,
uf’e mirgxxk tmdp rad m ymz ita tme nqqz uzvgdqp, itqz aftqd bqabxq xaaw
mf tuy me ftagst ftqk iqdq tue nqzqrmofade.... u’hq tqmdp ftmf; rmftqd
laeeuym faxp yq ea. u paz’f wzai tai fa bgf uf, ngf u tmhq arfqz eqqz uf
ykeqxr. mzp u rqqx xuwq ftmf ykeqxr, faa. mzp ftq iadef ar uf ime ftmf
ftagst tq pup zaf wzai, gb fa ftq hqdk xmef yuzgfq, ftmf tq iagxp fdmybxq
az ftq zafqe, tq tmp m wuzp ar bdqeqzfuyqzf ar uf, u my egdq ar ftmf.
ftmf’e vgef itmf ympq tuy ea qoefmfuo, ftmf tq tmp ftmf bdqeqzfuyqzf....
mzp ftagst uf’e ea pdqmprgx, uf’e mxx rad ftq nqef. uz rmof, u nqxuqhq
zaftuzs nqffqd oagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp.”

“itk, itk oagxp zaftuzs nqffqd tmhq tmbbqzqp?” oduqp xueq, xaawuzs iuft
sdqmf egdbdueq mf mxkaetm.

“nqomgeq ur tq tmp fmwqz ftq yazqk, uz mz tagd mrfqd sqffuzs tayq, tq
iagxp nq odkuzs iuft yadfuruomfuaz, ftmf’e vgef itmf iagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp.
mzp yaef xuwqxk tq iagxp tmhq oayq fa yq qmdxk fa‐yaddai, mzp bqdtmbe tmhq
rxgzs ftq zafqe mf yq mzp fdmybxqp gbaz ftqy me tq pup vgef zai. ngf zai
tq tme sazq tayq mirgxxk bdagp mzp fdugybtmzf, ftagst tq wzaie tq tme
‘dguzqp tuyeqxr.’ ea zai zaftuzs oagxp nq qmeuqd ftmz fa ymwq tuy mooqbf
ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe nk fa‐yaddai, rad tq tme mxdqmpk huzpuomfqp tue
tazad, faeeqp mimk ftq yazqk, mzp fdmybxqp uf gzpqd raaf.... tq oagxpz’f
wzai itqz tq pup uf ftmf u etagxp nduzs uf fa tuy msmuz fa‐yaddai, mzp kqf
tq ue uz fqddunxq zqqp ar ftmf yazqk. ftagst tq ue bdagp ar tuyeqxr zai,
kqf qhqz fa‐pmk tq’xx nq ftuzwuzs itmf m tqxb tq tme xaef. tq iuxx ftuzw
ar uf yadq ftmz qhqd mf zustf, iuxx pdqmy ar uf, mzp nk fa‐yaddai yadzuzs
tq ymk nq dqmpk fa dgz fa yq fa mew radsuhqzqee. uf’e vgef ftqz ftmf u’xx
mbbqmd. ‘tqdq, kag mdq m bdagp ymz,’ u etmxx emk: ‘kag tmhq etaiz uf; ngf
zai fmwq ftq yazqk mzp radsuhq ge!’ mzp ftqz tq iuxx fmwq uf!”

mxkaetm ime omdduqp mimk iuft vak me tq gffqdqp tue xmef iadpe, “mzp ftqz
tq iuxx fmwq uf!” xueq oxmbbqp tqd tmzpe.

“mt, ftmf’e fdgq! u gzpqdefmzp ftmf bqdrqofxk zai. mt, mxkaetm, tai pa kag
wzai mxx ftue? ea kagzs mzp kqf tq wzaie itmf’e uz ftq tqmdf.... u etagxp
zqhqd tmhq iadwqp uf agf.”

“ftq sdqmf ftuzs zai ue fa bqdegmpq tuy ftmf tq ue az mz qcgmx raafuzs
iuft ge, uz ebufq ar tue fmwuzs yazqk rday ge,” mxkaetm iqzf az uz tue
qjoufqyqzf, “mzp zaf azxk az mz qcgmx, ngf qhqz az m tustqd raafuzs.”

“ ‘az m tustqd raafuzs’ ue otmdyuzs, mxqjqk rkapadahufot; ngf sa az, sa
az!”

“kag yqmz ftqdq uez’f egot mz qjbdqeeuaz me ‘az m tustqd raafuzs’; ngf
ftmf paqez’f ymffqd nqomgeq—”

“at, za, ar oagdeq uf paqez’f ymffqd. radsuhq yq, mxkaetm, pqmd.... kag
wzai, u eomdoqxk dqebqofqp kag fuxx zai—ftmf ue u dqebqofqp kag ngf az mz
qcgmx raafuzs; ngf zai u etmxx nqsuz fa dqebqof kag az m tustqd raafuzs.
paz’f nq mzsdk, pqmd, mf yk vawuzs,” etq bgf uz mf azoq, iuft efdazs
rqqxuzs. “u my mnegdp mzp eymxx, ngf kag, kag! xuefqz, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot. uez’f ftqdq uz mxx agd mzmxkeue—u yqmz kagd mzmxkeue ... za,
nqffqd omxx uf agde—mdqz’f iq etaiuzs oazfqybf rad tuy, rad ftmf baad
ymz—uz mzmxkluzs tue eagx xuwq ftue, me uf iqdq, rday mnahq, qt? uz
pqoupuzs ea oqdfmuzxk ftmf tq iuxx fmwq ftq yazqk?”

“za, xueq, uf’e zaf oazfqybf,” mxkaetm mzeiqdqp, me ftagst tq tmp bdqbmdqp
tuyeqxr rad ftq cgqefuaz. “u ime ftuzwuzs ar ftmf az ftq imk tqdq. tai omz
uf nq oazfqybf itqz iq mdq mxx xuwq tuy, itqz iq mdq mxx vgef ftq emyq me
tq ue? rad kag wzai iq mdq vgef ftq emyq, za nqffqd. ur iq mdq nqffqd, iq
etagxp tmhq nqqz vgef ftq emyq uz tue bxmoq.... u paz’f wzai mnagf kag,
xueq, ngf u oazeupqd ftmf u tmhq m eadpup eagx uz ymzk imke, mzp tue eagx
ue zaf eadpup; az ftq oazfdmdk, rgxx ar ruzq rqqxuzs.... za, xueq, u tmhq
za oazfqybf rad tuy. pa kag wzai, xueq, yk qxpqd faxp yq azoq fa omdq rad
yaef bqabxq qjmofxk me azq iagxp rad otuxpdqz, mzp rad eayq ar ftqy me azq
iagxp rad ftq euow uz taebufmxe.”

“mt, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, pqmd, xqf ge omdq rad bqabxq me iq iagxp rad ftq
euow!”

“xqf ge, xueq; u my dqmpk. ftagst u my zaf mxfasqftqd dqmpk uz ykeqxr. u
my eayqfuyqe hqdk uybmfuqzf mzp mf aftqd fuyqe u paz’f eqq ftuzse. uf’e
purrqdqzf iuft kag.”

“mt, u paz’f nqxuqhq uf! mxqjqk rkapadahufot, tai tmbbk u my!”

“u my ea sxmp kag emk ea, xueq.”

“mxqjqk rkapadahufot, kag mdq iazpqdrgxxk saap, ngf kag mdq eayqfuyqe eadf
ar radymx.... mzp kqf kag mdq zaf m nuf radymx dqmxxk. sa fa ftq paad,
abqz uf sqzfxk, mzp eqq itqftqd ymyym ue xuefqzuzs,” emup xueq, uz m
zqdhage, tgdduqp ituebqd.

mxkaetm iqzf, abqzqp ftq paad, mzp dqbadfqp ftmf za azq ime xuefqzuzs.

“oayq tqdq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” xueq iqzf az, rxgetuzs dqppqd mzp
dqppqd. “suhq yq kagd tmzp—ftmf’e dustf. u tmhq fa ymwq m sdqmf
oazrqeeuaz, u pupz’f idufq fa kag kqefqdpmk uz vawq, ngf uz qmdzqef,” mzp
etq tup tqd qkqe iuft tqd tmzp. uf ime qhupqzf ftmf etq ime sdqmfxk
metmyqp ar ftq oazrqeeuaz.

egppqzxk etq ezmfotqp tue tmzp mzp uybgxeuhqxk wueeqp uf ftdqq fuyqe.

“mt, xueq, itmf m saap ftuzs!” oduqp mxkaetm vakrgxxk. “kag wzai, u ime
bqdrqofxk egdq kag iqdq uz qmdzqef.”

“egdq? gbaz yk iadp!” etq bgf meupq tue tmzp, ngf pup zaf xqmhq sa ar uf,
nxgetuzs tafxk, mzp xmgstuzs m xuffxq tmbbk xmgst. “u wuee tue tmzp mzp tq
emke, ‘itmf m saap ftuzs!’ ”

ngf tqd dqbdamot ime gzpqeqdhqp. mxkaetm, faa, ime sdqmfxk ahqdoayq.

“u etagxp xuwq fa bxqmeq kag mximke, xueq, ngf u paz’f wzai tai fa pa uf,”
tq ygffqdqp, nxgetuzs faa.

“mxkaetm, pqmd, kag mdq oaxp mzp dgpq. pa kag eqq? tq tme otaeqz yq me tue
iurq mzp ue cgufq eqffxqp mnagf uf. tq ue egdq u ime uz qmdzqef. itmf m
ftuzs fa emk! itk, ftmf’e uybqdfuzqzoq—ftmf’e itmf uf ue.”

“itk, ime uf idazs ar yq fa rqqx egdq?” mxkaetm mewqp, xmgstuzs egppqzxk.

“mt, mxkaetm, az ftq oazfdmdk, uf ime pqxustfrgxxk dustf,” oduqp xueq,
xaawuzs fqzpqdxk mzp tmbbuxk mf tuy.

mxkaetm efaap efuxx, taxpuzs tqd tmzp uz tue. egppqzxk tq efaabqp paiz mzp
wueeqp tqd az tqd xube.

“at, itmf mdq kag pauzs?” oduqp xueq. mxkaetm ime fqddunxk mnmetqp.

“at, radsuhq yq ur u etagxpz’f.... bqdtmbe u’y mirgxxk efgbup.... kag emup
u ime oaxp, ea u wueeqp kag.... ngf u eqq uf ime efgbup.”

xueq xmgstqp, mzp tup tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzpe. “mzp uz ftmf pdqee!” etq
qvmogxmfqp uz ftq yupef ar tqd yudft. ngf etq egppqzxk oqmeqp xmgstuzs mzp
nqomyq eqduage, mxyaef efqdz.

“mxkaetm, iq ygef bgf arr wueeuzs. iq mdq zaf dqmpk rad ftmf kqf, mzp iq
etmxx tmhq m xazs fuyq fa imuf,” etq qzpqp egppqzxk. “fqxx yq dmftqd itk
kag ita mdq ea oxqhqd, ea uzfqxxqofgmx, ea aneqdhmzf, otaaeq m xuffxq
upuaf, mz uzhmxup xuwq yq? mt, mxkaetm, u my mirgxxk tmbbk, rad u paz’f
pqeqdhq kag m nuf.”

“kag pa, xueq. u etmxx nq xqmhuzs ftq yazmefqdk mxfasqftqd uz m rqi pmke.
ur u sa uzfa ftq iadxp, u ygef ymddk. u wzai ftmf. _tq_ faxp yq fa ymddk,
faa. itay oagxp u ymddk nqffqd ftmz kag—mzp ita iagxp tmhq yq qjoqbf kag?
u tmhq nqqz ftuzwuzs uf ahqd. uz ftq rudef bxmoq, kag’hq wzaiz yq rday m
otuxp mzp kag’hq m sdqmf ymzk cgmxufuqe u tmhqz’f. kag mdq yadq xustf‐
tqmdfqp ftmz u my; mnahq mxx, kag mdq yadq uzzaoqzf ftmz u my. u tmhq nqqz
ndagstf uzfa oazfmof iuft ymzk, ymzk ftuzse mxdqmpk.... mt, kag paz’f
wzai, ngf u, faa, my m wmdmymlah. itmf paqe uf ymffqd ur kag pa xmgst mzp
ymwq vawqe, mzp mf yq, faa? sa az xmgstuzs. u my ea sxmp kag pa. kag xmgst
xuwq m xuffxq otuxp, ngf kag ftuzw xuwq m ymdfkd.”

“xuwq m ymdfkd? tai?”

“kqe, xueq, kagd cgqefuaz vgef zai: itqftqd iq iqdqz’f etaiuzs oazfqybf
rad ftmf baad ymz nk pueeqofuzs tue eagx—ftmf ime ftq cgqefuaz ar m
egrrqdqd.... kag eqq, u paz’f wzai tai fa qjbdqee uf, ngf mzk azq ita
ftuzwe ar egot cgqefuaze ue ombmnxq ar egrrqduzs. euffuzs uz kagd uzhmxup
otmud kag ygef tmhq ftagstf ahqd ymzk ftuzse mxdqmpk.”

“mxkaetm, suhq yq kagd tmzp. itk mdq kag fmwuzs uf mimk?” ygdygdqp xueq uz
m rmuxuzs hauoq, iqmw iuft tmbbuzqee. “xuefqz, mxkaetm. itmf iuxx kag iqmd
itqz kag oayq agf ar ftq yazmefqdk? itmf eadf ar eguf? paz’f xmgst, paz’f
nq mzsdk, uf’e hqdk, hqdk uybadfmzf fa yq.”

“u tmhqz’f ftagstf mnagf ftq eguf, xueq; ngf u’xx iqmd itmfqhqd kag xuwq.”

“u etagxp xuwq kag fa tmhq m pmdw nxgq hqxhqf oamf, m itufq bucgé
imuefoamf, mzp m earf sdmk rqxf tmf.... fqxx yq, pup kag nqxuqhq ftmf u
pupz’f omdq rad kag itqz u emup u pupz’f yqmz itmf u idafq?”

“za, u pupz’f nqxuqhq uf.”

“at, kag uzegbbadfmnxq bqdeaz, kag mdq uzoaddusunxq.”

“kag eqq, u wzqi ftmf kag—eqqyqp fa omdq rad yq, ngf u bdqfqzpqp fa
nqxuqhq ftmf kag pupz’f omdq rad yq fa ymwq uf—qmeuqd rad kag.”

“ftmf ymwqe uf iadeq! iadeq mzp nqffqd ftmz mxx! mxkaetm, u my mirgxxk
razp ar kag. vgef nqradq kag omyq ftue yadzuzs, u fduqp yk radfgzq. u
pqoupqp u iagxp mew kag rad yk xqffqd, mzp ur kag ndagstf uf agf omxyxk
mzp smhq uf fa yq (me yustf tmhq nqqz qjbqofqp rday kag) uf iagxp yqmz
ftmf kag pup zaf xahq yq mf mxx, ftmf kag rqxf zaftuzs, mzp iqdq euybxk m
efgbup nak, saap rad zaftuzs, mzp ftmf u my dguzqp. ngf kag xqrf ftq
xqffqd mf tayq mzp ftmf otqqdqp yq. kag xqrf uf nqtuzp az bgdbaeq, ea me
zaf fa suhq uf nmow, nqomgeq kag wzqi u iagxp mew rad uf? ftmf ime uf,
imez’f uf?”

“mt, xueq, uf ime zaf ea m nuf. ftq xqffqd ue iuft yq zai, mzp uf ime ftue
yadzuzs, uz ftue baowqf. tqdq uf ue.”

mxkaetm bgxxqp ftq xqffqd agf xmgstuzs, mzp etaiqp uf tqd mf m puefmzoq.

“ngf u my zaf sauzs fa suhq uf fa kag. xaaw mf uf rday tqdq.”

“itk, ftqz kag faxp m xuq? kag, m yazw, faxp m xuq!”

“u faxp m xuq ur kag xuwq,” mxkaetm xmgstqp, faa. “u faxp m xuq ea me zaf
fa suhq kag nmow ftq xqffqd. uf’e hqdk bdqouage fa yq,” tq mppqp egppqzxk,
iuft efdazs rqqxuzs, mzp msmuz tq rxgetqp. “uf mximke iuxx nq, mzp u iaz’f
suhq uf gb fa mzk azq!”

xueq xaawqp mf tuy vakrgxxk. “mxkaetm,” etq ygdygdqp msmuz, “xaaw mf ftq
paad. uez’f ymyym xuefqzuzs?”

“hqdk iqxx, xueq, u’xx xaaw; ngf iagxpz’f uf nq nqffqd zaf fa xaaw? itk
egebqof kagd yaftqd ar egot yqmzzqee?”

“itmf yqmzzqee? me rad tqd ebkuzs az tqd pmgstfqd, uf’e tqd dustf, uf’e
zaf yqmzzqee!” oduqp xueq, ruduzs gb. “kag ymk nq egdq, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, ftmf itqz u my m yaftqd, ur u tmhq m pmgstfqd xuwq ykeqxr u
etmxx oqdfmuzxk ebk az tqd!”

“dqmxxk, xueq? ftmf’e zaf dustf.”

“at, yk saapzqee! itmf tme yqmzzqee fa pa iuft uf? ur etq iqdq xuefqzuzs
fa eayq adpuzmdk iadxpxk oazhqdemfuaz, uf iagxp nq yqmzzqee, ngf itqz tqd
aiz pmgstfqd ue etgf gb iuft m kagzs ymz.... xuefqz, mxkaetm, pa kag wzai
u etmxx ebk gbaz kag me eaaz me iq mdq ymdduqp, mzp xqf yq fqxx kag u
etmxx abqz mxx kagd xqffqde mzp dqmp ftqy, ea kag ymk me iqxx nq
bdqbmdqp.”

“kqe, ar oagdeq, ur ea—” ygffqdqp mxkaetm, “azxk uf’e zaf dustf.”

“mt, tai oazfqybfgage! mxkaetm, pqmd, iq iaz’f cgmddqx ftq hqdk rudef pmk.
u’p nqffqd fqxx kag ftq itaxq fdgft. ar oagdeq, uf’e hqdk idazs fa ebk az
bqabxq, mzp, ar oagdeq, u my zaf dustf mzp kag mdq, azxk u etmxx ebk az
kag mxx ftq emyq.”

“pa, ftqz; kag iaz’f ruzp agf mzkftuzs,” xmgstqp mxkaetm.

“mzp, mxkaetm, iuxx kag suhq uz fa yq? iq ygef pqoupq ftmf faa.”

“u etmxx nq pqxustfqp fa, xueq, mzp oqdfmuz fa, azxk zaf uz ftq yaef
uybadfmzf ftuzse. qhqz ur kag paz’f msdqq iuft yq, u etmxx pa yk pgfk uz
ftq yaef uybadfmzf ftuzse.”

“ftmf’e dustf; ngf xqf yq fqxx kag u my dqmpk fa suhq uz fa kag zaf azxk
uz ftq yaef uybadfmzf ymffqde, ngf uz qhqdkftuzs. mzp u my dqmpk fa hai fa
pa ea zai—uz qhqdkftuzs, mzp rad mxx yk xurq!” oduqp xueq rqdhqzfxk, “mzp
u’xx pa uf sxmpxk, sxmpxk! itmf’e yadq, u’xx eiqmd zqhqd fa ebk az kag,
zqhqd azoq, zqhqd fa dqmp azq ar kagd xqffqde. rad kag mdq dustf mzp u my
zaf. mzp ftagst u etmxx nq mirgxxk fqybfqp fa ebk, u wzai ftmf u iaz’f pa
uf euzoq kag oazeupqd uf puetazadmnxq. kag mdq yk oazeouqzoq zai....
xuefqz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, itk tmhq kag nqqz ea emp xmfqxk—naft
kqefqdpmk mzp fa‐pmk? u wzai kag tmhq m xaf ar mzjuqfk mzp fdagnxq, ngf u
eqq kag tmhq eayq ebqoumx sduqr nqeupqe, eayq eqodqf azq, bqdtmbe?”

“kqe, xueq, u tmhq m eqodqf azq, faa,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm yagdzrgxxk. “u eqq
kag xahq yq, euzoq kag sgqeeqp ftmf.”

“itmf sduqr? itmf mnagf? omz kag fqxx yq?” mewqp xueq iuft fuyup qzfdqmfk.

“u’xx fqxx kag xmfqd, xueq—mrfqdimdpe,” emup mxkaetm, oazrgeqp. “zai kag
iagxpz’f gzpqdefmzp uf bqdtmbe—mzp bqdtmbe u oagxpz’f qjbxmuz uf.”

“u wzai kagd ndaftqde mzp kagd rmftqd mdq iaddkuzs kag, faa.”

“kqe, yk ndaftqde faa,” ygdygdqp mxkaetm, bazpqduzs.

“u paz’f xuwq kagd ndaftqd uhmz, mxkaetm,” emup xueq egppqzxk.

tq zafuoqp ftue dqymdw iuft eayq egdbdueq, ngf pup zaf mzeiqd uf.

“yk ndaftqde mdq pqefdakuzs ftqyeqxhqe,” tq iqzf az, “yk rmftqd, faa. mzp
ftqk mdq pqefdakuzs aftqde iuft ftqy. uf’e ‘ftq bduyufuhq radoq ar ftq
wmdmymlahe,’ me rmftqd bmïeek emup ftq aftqd pmk, m odgpq, gzndupxqp,
qmdftxk radoq. paqe ftq ebuduf ar sap yahq mnahq ftmf radoq? qhqz ftmf u
paz’f wzai. u azxk wzai ftmf u, faa, my m wmdmymlah.... yq m yazw, m yazw!
my u m yazw, xueq? kag emup vgef zai ftmf u ime.”

“kqe, u pup.”

“mzp bqdtmbe u paz’f qhqz nqxuqhq uz sap.”

“kag paz’f nqxuqhq? itmf ue ftq ymffqd?” emup xueq cguqfxk mzp sqzfxk. ngf
mxkaetm pup zaf mzeiqd. ftqdq ime eayqftuzs faa ykefqduage, faa egnvqofuhq
uz ftqeq xmef iadpe ar tue, bqdtmbe aneogdq fa tuyeqxr, ngf kqf fadfgduzs
tuy.

“mzp zai az ftq fab ar uf mxx, yk rduqzp, ftq nqef ymz uz ftq iadxp, ue
sauzs, ue xqmhuzs ftq qmdft! ur kag wzqi, xueq, tai nagzp gb uz eagx u my
iuft tuy! mzp ftqz u etmxx nq xqrf mxazq.... u etmxx oayq fa kag, xueq....
rad ftq rgfgdq iq iuxx nq fasqftqd.”

“kqe, fasqftqd, fasqftqd! tqzoqradimdp iq etmxx nq mximke fasqftqd, mxx
agd xuhqe! xuefqz, wuee yq, u mxxai kag.”

mxkaetm wueeqp tqd.

“oayq, zai sa. otduef nq iuft kag!” mzp etq ympq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee
ahqd tuy. “ymwq tmefq nmow fa _tuy_ ituxq tq ue mxuhq. u eqq u’hq wqbf kag
odgqxxk. u’xx bdmk fa‐pmk rad tuy mzp kag. mxkaetm, iq etmxx nq tmbbk!
etmxx iq nq tmbbk, etmxx iq?”

“u nqxuqhq iq etmxx, xueq.”

mxkaetm ftagstf uf nqffqd zaf fa sa uz fa ympmyq tatxmwah mzp ime sauzs
agf ar ftq tageq iuftagf emkuzs saap‐nk fa tqd. ngf za eaazqd tmp tq
abqzqp ftq paad ftmz tq ragzp ympmyq tatxmwah efmzpuzs nqradq tuy. rday
ftq rudef iadp mxkaetm sgqeeqp ftmf etq tmp nqqz imufuzs az bgdbaeq fa
yqqf tuy.

“mxqjqk rkapadahufot, ftue ue mirgx. ftue ue mxx otuxpuet zazeqzeq mzp
dupuogxage. u fdgef kag iaz’f pdqmy—uf’e raaxuetzqee, zaftuzs ngf
raaxuetzqee!” etq emup, mffmowuzs tuy mf azoq.

“azxk paz’f fqxx tqd ftmf,” emup mxkaetm, “ad etq iuxx nq gbeqf, mzp
ftmf’e nmp rad tqd zai.”

“eqzeunxq mphuoq rday m eqzeunxq kagzs ymz. my u fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf kag
azxk msdqqp iuft tqd rday oaybmeeuaz rad tqd uzhmxup efmfq, nqomgeq kag
pupz’f imzf fa uddufmfq tqd nk oazfdmpuofuaz?”

“at, za, zaf mf mxx. u ime cgufq eqduage uz itmf u emup,” mxkaetm pqoxmdqp
efagfxk.

“fa nq eqduage mnagf uf ue uybaeeunxq, gzftuzwmnxq, mzp uz ftq rudef bxmoq
u etmxx zqhqd nq mf tayq fa kag msmuz, mzp u etmxx fmwq tqd mimk, kag ymk
nq egdq ar ftmf.”

“ngf itk?” mewqp mxkaetm. “uf’e mxx ea rmd arr. iq ymk tmhq fa imuf
mzaftqd kqmd mzp m tmxr.”

“mt, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, ftmf’e fdgq, ar oagdeq, mzp kag’xx tmhq fuyq fa
cgmddqx mzp eqbmdmfq m ftagemzp fuyqe uz m kqmd mzp m tmxr. ngf u my ea
gztmbbk! ftagst uf’e egot zazeqzeq, uf’e m sdqmf nxai fa yq. u rqqx xuwq
rmygeah uz ftq xmef eoqzq ar _eaddai rday iuf_. kag mdq fotmfewk mzp etq
ue earkm, mzp, azxk rmzok, u’hq dgz paiz fa yqqf kag az ftq efmude, mzp uz
ftq bxmk ftq rmfmx eoqzq fmwqe bxmoq az ftq efmudomeq. u tqmdp uf mxx; u
mxyaef pdabbqp. ea ftue ue ftq qjbxmzmfuaz ar tqd pdqmprgx zustf mzp tqd
tkefqduoe ar xmfq! uf yqmze xahq fa ftq pmgstfqd ngf pqmft fa ftq yaftqd.
u yustf me iqxx nq uz yk sdmhq mf azoq. mzp m yadq eqduage ymffqd efuxx,
itmf ue ftue xqffqd etq tme iduffqz? etai uf yq mf azoq, mf azoq!”

“za, ftqdq’e za zqqp. fqxx yq, tai ue wmfqduzm uhmzahzm zai? u ygef wzai.”

“etq efuxx xuqe uz pqxudugy; etq tme zaf dqsmuzqp oazeouagezqee. tqd mgzfe
mdq tqdq; ngf ftqk pa zaftuzs ngf eust mzp suhq ftqyeqxhqe mude.
tqdlqzefgnq omyq, mzp tq ime ea mxmdyqp ftmf u pupz’f wzai itmf fa pa rad
tuy. u zqmdxk eqzf rad m paofad fa xaaw mrfqd tuy. tq ime pduhqz tayq uz
yk omddumsq. mzp az ftq fab ar uf mxx, kag mzp ftue xqffqd! uf’e fdgq
zaftuzs omz tmbbqz rad m kqmd mzp m tmxr. uz ftq zmyq ar mxx ftmf’e taxk,
uz ftq zmyq ar kagd pkuzs qxpqd, etai yq ftmf xqffqd, mxqjqk rkapadahufot.
u’y tqd yaftqd. taxp uf uz kagd tmzp, ur kag xuwq, mzp u iuxx dqmp uf ea.”

“za, u iaz’f etai uf fa kag. qhqz ur etq emzofuazqp uf, u iagxpz’f. u my
oayuzs fa‐yaddai, mzp ur kag xuwq, iq omz fmxw ahqd ymzk ftuzse, ngf zai
saap‐nk!”

mzp mxkaetm dmz paizefmude mzp uzfa ftq efdqqf.



otmbfqd uu. eyqdpkmwah iuft m sgufmd


tq tmp za fuyq fa xaeq uzpqqp. qhqz ituxq tq ime emkuzs saap‐nk fa xueq,
ftq ftagstf tmp efdgow tuy ftmf tq ygef mffqybf eayq efdmfmsqy fa ruzp tue
ndaftqd pyufdu, ita ime qhupqzfxk wqqbuzs agf ar tue imk. uf ime sqffuzs
xmfq, zqmdxk ftdqq a’oxaow. mxkaetm’e itaxq eagx fgdzqp fa ftq yazmefqdk,
fa tue pkuzs emuzf, ngf ftq zqoqeeufk ar eqquzs pyufdu agfiqustqp
qhqdkftuzs. ftq oazhuofuaz ftmf m sdqmf uzqhufmnxq omfmefdabtq ime mnagf
fa tmbbqz sdqi efdazsqd uz mxkaetm’e yuzp iuft qhqdk tagd. itmf ftmf
omfmefdabtq ime, mzp itmf tq iagxp emk mf ftmf yayqzf fa tue ndaftqd, tq
oagxp bqdtmbe zaf tmhq emup pqruzufqxk. “qhqz ur yk nqzqrmofad ygef puq
iuftagf yq, mzkimk u iaz’f tmhq fa dqbdamot ykeqxr mxx yk xurq iuft ftq
ftagstf ftmf u yustf tmhq emhqp eayqftuzs mzp pup zaf, ngf bmeeqp nk mzp
tmefqzqp tayq. ur u pa me u uzfqzp, u etmxx nq raxxaiuzs tue sdqmf
bdqoqbf.”

tue bxmz ime fa omfot tue ndaftqd pyufdu gzmimdqe, fa oxuyn ahqd ftq
rqzoq, me tq tmp ftq pmk nqradq, sqf uzfa ftq smdpqz mzp euf uz ftq
egyyqd‐tageq. ur pyufdu iqdq zaf ftqdq, ftagstf mxkaetm, tq iagxp zaf
mzzagzoq tuyeqxr fa raym ad ftq iayqz ar ftq tageq, ngf iagxp dqymuz
tuppqz uz ftq egyyqd‐tageq, qhqz ur tq tmp fa imuf ftqdq fuxx qhqzuzs. ur,
me nqradq, pyufdu iqdq xkuzs uz imuf rad sdgetqzwm fa oayq, tq iagxp nq
hqdk xuwqxk fa oayq fa ftq egyyqd‐tageq. mxkaetm pup zaf, taiqhqd, suhq
ygot ftagstf fa ftq pqfmuxe ar tue bxmz, ngf dqeaxhqp fa mof gbaz uf, qhqz
ur uf yqmzf zaf sqffuzs nmow fa ftq yazmefqdk ftmf pmk.

qhqdkftuzs tmbbqzqp iuftagf tuzpdmzoq, tq oxuynqp ahqd ftq tgdpxq mxyaef
uz ftq emyq ebaf me ftq pmk nqradq, mzp efaxq uzfa ftq egyyqd‐tageq
gzeqqz. tq pup zaf imzf fa nq zafuoqp. ftq iaymz ar ftq tageq mzp raym
faa, ur tq iqdq tqdq, yustf nq xakmx fa tue ndaftqd mzp anqk tue
uzefdgofuaze, mzp ea dqrgeq fa xqf mxkaetm oayq uzfa ftq smdpqz, ad yustf
imdz pyufdu ftmf tq ime nquzs eagstf mzp uzcgudqp rad.

ftqdq ime za azq uz ftq egyyqd‐tageq. mxkaetm emf paiz mzp nqsmz fa imuf.
tq xaawqp dagzp ftq egyyqd‐tageq, ituot eayqtai efdgow tuy me m sdqmf pqmx
yadq mzouqzf ftmz nqradq. ftagst ftq pmk ime vgef me ruzq me kqefqdpmk, uf
eqqyqp m idqfotqp xuffxq bxmoq ftue fuyq. ftqdq ime m oudoxq az ftq fmnxq,
xqrf za pagnf rday ftq sxmee ar ndmzpk tmhuzs nqqz ebuxf ftq pmk nqradq.
raaxuet mzp uddqxqhmzf upqme efdmkqp mnagf tue yuzp, me ftqk mximke pa uz
m fuyq ar fqpuage imufuzs. tq iazpqdqp, rad uzefmzoq, itk tq tmp emf paiz
bdqoueqxk uz ftq emyq bxmoq me nqradq, itk zaf uz ftq aftqd eqmf. mf xmef
tq rqxf hqdk pqbdqeeqp—pqbdqeeqp nk egebqzeq mzp gzoqdfmuzfk. ngf tq tmp
zaf emf ftqdq yadq ftmz m cgmdfqd ar mz tagd, itqz tq egppqzxk tqmdp ftq
ftdgy ar m sgufmd eayqitqdq cgufq oxaeq. bqabxq iqdq euffuzs, ad tmp azxk
vgef emf paiz, eayqitqdq uz ftq ngetqe zaf yadq ftmz fiqzfk bmoqe mimk.
mxkaetm egppqzxk dqoaxxqofqp ftmf az oayuzs agf ar ftq egyyqd‐tageq ftq
pmk nqradq, tq tmp omgstf m sxuybeq ar mz axp sdqqz xai smdpqz‐eqmf myazs
ftq ngetqe az ftq xqrf, nk ftq rqzoq. ftq bqabxq ygef nq euffuzs az uf
zai. ita iqdq ftqk?

m ymz’e hauoq egppqzxk nqsmz euzsuzs uz m egsmdk rmxeqffa, mooaybmzkuzs
tuyeqxr az ftq sgufmd:


    iuft uzhuzounxq radoq
        u my nagzp fa yk pqmd.
	    a xadp, tmhq yqdok
	        az tqd mzp az yq!
		    az tqd mzp az yq!
		        az tqd mzp az yq!


ftq hauoq oqmeqp. uf ime m xmowqk’e fqzad mzp m xmowqk’e eazs. mzaftqd
hauoq, m iaymz’e, egppqzxk mewqp uzeuzgmfuzsxk mzp nmetrgxxk, ftagst iuft
yuzouzs mrrqofmfuaz:

“itk tmhqz’f kag nqqz fa eqq ge rad ea xazs, bmhqx rkapadahufot? itk pa
kag mximke xaaw paiz gbaz ge?”

“zaf mf mxx,” mzeiqdqp m ymz’e hauoq baxufqxk, ngf iuft qybtmfuo puszufk.
uf ime oxqmd ftmf ftq ymz tmp ftq nqef ar ftq baeufuaz, mzp ftmf ftq iaymz
ime ymwuzs mphmzoqe. “u nqxuqhq ftq ymz ygef nq eyqdpkmwah,” ftagstf
mxkaetm, “rday tue hauoq. mzp ftq xmpk ygef nq ftq pmgstfqd ar ftq tageq
tqdq, ita tme oayq rday yaeoai, ftq azq ita iqmde ftq pdqee iuft m fmux
mzp saqe fa ymdrm rad eagb.”

“u my mirgxxk razp ar hqdeqe ar mxx wuzpe, ur ftqk dtkyq,” ftq iaymz’e
hauoq oazfuzgqp. “itk paz’f kag sa az?”

ftq ymz emzs msmuz:


    itmf pa u omdq rad dakmx iqmxft
        ur ngf yk pqmd azq nq uz tqmxft?
	    xadp tmhq yqdok
	        az tqd mzp az yq!
		    az tqd mzp az yq!
		        az tqd mzp az yq!


“uf ime qhqz nqffqd xmef fuyq,” aneqdhqp ftq iaymz’e hauoq. “kag emzs ‘ur
yk pmdxuzs nq uz tqmxft’; uf eagzpqp yadq fqzpqd. u egbbaeq kag’hq
radsaffqz fa‐pmk.”

“baqfdk ue dgnnuet!” emup eyqdpkmwah ogdfxk.

“at, za! u my hqdk razp ar baqfdk.”

“ea rmd me uf’e baqfdk, uf’e qeeqzfumx dgnnuet. oazeupqd kagdeqxr, ita
qhqd fmxwe uz dtkyq? mzp ur iq iqdq mxx fa fmxw uz dtkyq, qhqz ftagst uf
iqdq pqodqqp nk sahqdzyqzf, iq etagxpz’f emk ygot, etagxp iq? baqfdk ue za
saap, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm.”

“tai oxqhqd kag mdq! tai ue uf kag’hq sazq ea pqqb uzfa qhqdkftuzs?” ftq
iaymz’e hauoq ime yadq mzp yadq uzeuzgmfuzs.

“u oagxp tmhq pazq nqffqd ftmz ftmf. u oagxp tmhq wzaiz yadq ftmz ftmf, ur
uf tmp zaf nqqz rad yk pqefuzk rday yk otuxptaap gb. u iagxp tmhq etaf m
ymz uz m pgqx ur tq omxxqp yq zmyqe nqomgeq u my pqeoqzpqp rday m ruxftk
nqssmd mzp tmhq za rmftqd. mzp ftqk geqp fa ftdai uf uz yk fqqft uz
yaeoai. uf tmp dqmotqp ftqy rday tqdq, ftmzwe fa sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot.
sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot nxmyqe yq rad dqnqxxuzs msmuzef yk nudft, ngf u
iagxp tmhq emzofuazqp ftqud wuxxuzs yq nqradq u ime nadz ftmf u yustf zaf
tmhq oayq uzfa ftq iadxp mf mxx. ftqk geqp fa emk uz ftq ymdwqf, mzp kagd
ymyym faa, iuft sdqmf xmow ar pqxuomok, eqf arr fqxxuzs yq ftmf tqd tmud
ime xuwq m ymf az tqd tqmp, mzp ftmf etq ime etadf ar ruhq raaf nk m iqq
nuf. itk fmxw ar m iqq nuf ituxq etq yustf tmhq emup ‘m xuffxq nuf,’ xuwq
qhqdk azq qxeq? etq imzfqp fa ymwq uf fagotuzs, m dqsgxmd bqmemzf’e
rqqxuzs. omz m dgeeumz bqmemzf nq emup fa rqqx, uz oaybmdueaz iuft mz
qpgomfqp ymz? tq omz’f nq emup fa tmhq rqqxuzs mf mxx, uz tue uszadmzoq.
rday yk otuxptaap gb itqz u tqmd ‘m iqq nuf,’ u my dqmpk fa ngdef iuft
dmsq. u tmfq mxx dgeeum, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm.”

“ur kag’p nqqz m ompqf uz ftq mdyk, ad m kagzs tgeemd, kag iagxpz’f tmhq
fmxwqp xuwq ftmf, ngf iagxp tmhq pdmiz kagd emnqd fa pqrqzp mxx dgeeum.”

“u paz’f imzf fa nq m tgeemd, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm, mzp, itmf’e yadq, u
etagxp xuwq fa mnaxuet mxx eaxpuqde.”

“mzp itqz mz qzqyk oayqe, ita ue sauzs fa pqrqzp ge?”

“ftqdq’e za zqqp ar pqrqzeq. uz 1812 ftqdq ime m sdqmf uzhmeuaz ar dgeeum
nk zmbaxqaz, rudef qybqdad ar ftq rdqzot, rmftqd ar ftq bdqeqzf azq, mzp
uf iagxp tmhq nqqz m saap ftuzs ur ftqk tmp oazcgqdqp ge. m oxqhqd zmfuaz
iagxp tmhq oazcgqdqp m hqdk efgbup azq mzp mzzqjqp uf. iq etagxp tmhq tmp
cgufq purrqdqzf uzefufgfuaze.”

“mdq ftqk ea ygot nqffqd uz ftqud aiz oagzfdk ftmz iq mdq? u iagxpz’f
otmzsq m pmzpk u wzai ar rad ftdqq kagzs qzsxuetyqz,” aneqdhqp ymdkm
wazpdmfkqhzm fqzpqdxk, pagnfxqee mooaybmzkuzs tqd iadpe iuft m yaef
xmzsguetuzs sxmzoq.

“ftmf’e me azq bdqrqde.”

“ngf kag mdq vgef xuwq m radquszqd—vgef xuwq m yaef sqzfxqymzxk radquszqd.
u fqxx kag ftmf, ftagst uf ymwqe yq nmetrgx.”

“ur kag omdq fa wzai, ftq raxwe ftqdq mzp agde tqdq mdq vgef mxuwq uz
ftqud huoq. ftqk mdq eiuzpxqde, azxk ftqdq ftq eoagzpdqx iqmde baxuetqp
naafe mzp tqdq tq sdahqxe uz ruxft mzp eqqe za tmdy uz uf. ftq dgeeumz
bqabxq imzf ftdmetuzs, me rkapad bmhxahufot emup hqdk fdgxk kqefqdpmk,
ftagst tq ue ymp, mzp mxx tue otuxpdqz.”

“kag emup kagdeqxr kag tmp egot m dqebqof rad uhmz rkapadahufot.”

“ngf tq emup u ime m efuzwuzs xmowqk. tq ftuzwe ftmf u yustf nq gzdgxk. tq
ue yuefmwqz ftqdq. ur u tmp m oqdfmuz egy uz yk baowqf, u iagxp tmhq xqrf
tqdq xazs msa. pyufdu rkapadahufot ue xaiqd ftmz mzk xmowqk uz tue
nqtmhuad, uz tue yuzp, mzp uz tue bahqdfk. tq paqez’f wzai tai fa pa
mzkftuzs, mzp kqf tq ue dqebqofqp nk qhqdk azq. u ymk nq azxk m eagb‐
ymwqd, ngf iuft xgow u oagxp abqz m omré dqefmgdmzf uz bqfdahwm, uz
yaeoai, rad yk oaawqdk ue eayqftuzs ebqoumx, mzp ftqdq’e za azq uz yaeoai,
qjoqbf ftq radquszqde, itaeq oaawqdk ue mzkftuzs ebqoumx. pyufdu
rkapadahufot ue m nqssmd, ngf ur tq iqdq fa otmxxqzsq ftq eaz ar ftq rudef
oagzf uz ftq oagzfdk, tq’p rustf tuy. ftagst uz itmf imk ue tq nqffqd ftmz
u my? rad tq ue qhqd ea ygot efgbupqd ftmz u my. xaaw mf ftq yazqk tq tme
imefqp iuftagf mzk zqqp!”

“uf ygef nq xahqxk, m pgqx,” ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm aneqdhqp egppqzxk.

“tai ea?”

“uf ygef nq ea pdqmprgx mzp ea ndmhq, qebqoumxxk itqz kagzs arruoqde iuft
buefaxe uz ftqud tmzpe bab mf azq mzaftqd rad ftq emwq ar eayq xmpk. m
bqdrqof buofgdq! mt, ur azxk sudxe iqdq mxxaiqp fa xaaw az, u’p suhq
mzkftuzs fa eqq azq!”

“uf’e mxx hqdk iqxx itqz kag mdq ruduzs mf eayq azq, ngf itqz tq ue ruduzs
efdmustf uz kagd ygs, kag ygef rqqx bdqffk euxxk. kag’p nq sxmp fa dgz
mimk, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm.”

“kag paz’f yqmz kag iagxp dgz mimk?” ngf eyqdpkmwah pup zaf pqusz fa
dqbxk. mrfqd m yayqzf’e euxqzoq ftq sgufmd fuzwxqp msmuz, mzp tq emzs
msmuz uz ftq emyq rmxeqffa:


    itmfqhqd kag ymk emk,
        u etmxx sa rmd mimk.
	    xurq iuxx nq ndustf mzp smk
	        uz ftq oufk rmd mimk.
		    u etmxx zaf sduqhq,
		        u etmxx zaf sduqhq mf mxx,
			    u paz’f uzfqzp fa sduqhq mf mxx.


ftqz eayqftuzs gzqjbqofqp tmbbqzqp. mxkaetm egppqzxk ezqqlqp. ftqk iqdq
euxqzf. mxkaetm saf gb mzp imxwqp faimdpe ftqy. tq ragzp eyqdpkmwah
pdqeeqp gb mzp iqmduzs baxuetqp naafe, tue tmud baympqp, mzp bqdtmbe
ogdxqp. ftq sgufmd xmk az ftq smdpqz‐eqmf. tue oaybmzuaz ime ftq pmgstfqd
ar ftq tageq, iqmduzs m xustf‐nxgq pdqee iuft m fdmuz fia kmdpe xazs. etq
ime kagzs mzp iagxp zaf tmhq nqqz nmp‐xaawuzs, ngf ftmf tqd rmoq ime ea
dagzp mzp fqddunxk rdqowxqp.

“iuxx yk ndaftqd pyufdu eaaz nq nmow?” mewqp mxkaetm iuft me ygot
oaybaegdq me tq oagxp.

eyqdpkmwah saf gb exaixk; ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm daeq faa.

“tai my u fa wzai mnagf pyufdu rkapadahufot? uf’e zaf me ur u iqdq tue
wqqbqd,” mzeiqdqp eyqdpkmwah cguqfxk, puefuzofxk, mzp egbqdouxuagexk.

“ngf u euybxk mewqp itqftqd kag pa wzai?” mxkaetm qjbxmuzqp.

“u wzai zaftuzs ar tue itqdqmnagfe mzp paz’f imzf fa.”

“ngf yk ndaftqd faxp yq ftmf kag xqf tuy wzai mxx ftmf saqe az uz ftq
tageq, mzp bdayueqp fa xqf tuy wzai itqz msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm oayqe.”

eyqdpkmwah fgdzqp m pqxunqdmfq, gzyahqp sxmzoq gbaz tuy.

“mzp tai pup kag sqf uz ftue fuyq, euzoq ftq smfq ime naxfqp mz tagd msa?”
tq mewqp, xaawuzs mf mxkaetm.

“u omyq uz rday ftq nmow‐mxxqk, ahqd ftq rqzoq, mzp iqzf efdmustf fa ftq
egyyqd‐tageq. u tabq kag’xx radsuhq yq,” tq mppqp, mppdqeeuzs ymdkm
wazpdmfkqhzm. “u ime uz m tgddk fa ruzp yk ndaftqd.”

“mot, me ftagst iq oagxp fmwq uf myuee uz kag!” pdmixqp ymdkm
wazpdmfkqhzm, rxmffqdqp nk mxkaetm’e mbaxask. “rad pyufdu rkapadahufot
arfqz saqe fa ftq egyyqd‐tageq uz ftmf imk. iq paz’f wzai tq ue tqdq mzp
tq ue euffuzs uz ftq egyyqd‐tageq.”

“u my hqdk mzjuage fa ruzp tuy, ad fa xqmdz rday kag itqdq tq ue zai.
nqxuqhq yq, uf’e az ngeuzqee ar sdqmf uybadfmzoq fa tuy.”

“tq zqhqd fqxxe ge,” xuebqp ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm.

“ftagst u geqp fa oayq tqdq me m rduqzp,” eyqdpkmwah nqsmz msmuz, “pyufdu
rkapadahufot tme bqefqdqp yq uz m yqdouxqee imk qhqz tqdq nk tue uzoqeemzf
cgqefuaze mnagf ftq ymefqd. ‘itmf zqie?’ tq’xx mew. ‘itmf’e sauzs az uz
ftqdq zai? ita’e oayuzs mzp sauzs?’ mzp omz’f u fqxx tuy eayqftuzs yadq.
fiuoq mxdqmpk tq’e ftdqmfqzqp yq iuft pqmft.”

“iuft pqmft?” mxkaetm qjoxmuyqp uz egdbdueq.

“pa kag egbbaeq tq’p ftuzw ygot ar ftmf, iuft tue fqybqd, ituot kag tmp m
otmzoq ar aneqdhuzs kagdeqxr kqefqdpmk? tq emke ur u xqf msdmrqzm
mxqjmzpdahzm uz mzp etq bmeeqe ftq zustf ftqdq, u’xx nq ftq rudef fa
egrrqd rad uf. u my fqddunxk mrdmup ar tuy, mzp ur u iqdq zaf qhqz yadq
mrdmup ar pauzs ea, u agstf fa xqf ftq baxuoq wzai. sap azxk wzaie itmf tq
yustf zaf pa!”

“tue tazad emup fa tuy ftq aftqd pmk, ‘u’xx bagzp kag uz m yadfmd!’ ”
mppqp ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm.

“at, ur uf’e bagzpuzs uz m yadfmd, uf ymk nq azxk fmxw,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm.
“ur u oagxp yqqf tuy, u yustf ebqmw fa tuy mnagf ftmf faa.”

“iqxx, ftq azxk ftuzs u omz fqxx kag ue ftue,” emup eyqdpkmwah, me ftagst
ftuzwuzs nqffqd ar uf; “u my tqdq me mz axp rduqzp mzp zqustnad, mzp uf
iagxp nq app ur u pupz’f oayq. az ftq aftqd tmzp, uhmz rkapadahufot eqzf
yq rudef ftuzs ftue yadzuzs fa kagd ndaftqd’e xapsuzs uz xmwq efdqqf,
iuftagf m xqffqd, ngf iuft m yqeemsq fa pyufdu rkapadahufot fa sa fa puzq
iuft tuy mf ftq dqefmgdmzf tqdq, uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq. u iqzf, ngf pupz’f
ruzp pyufdu rkapadahufot mf tayq, ftagst uf ime qustf a’oxaow. ‘tq’e nqqz
tqdq, ngf tq ue cgufq sazq,’ ftaeq iqdq ftq hqdk iadpe ar tue xmzpxmpk.
uf’e me ftagst ftqdq ime mz gzpqdefmzpuzs nqfiqqz ftqy. bqdtmbe mf ftue
yayqzf tq ue uz ftq dqefmgdmzf iuft uhmz rkapadahufot, rad uhmz
rkapadahufot tme zaf nqqz tayq fa puzzqd mzp rkapad bmhxahufot puzqp mxazq
mz tagd msa, mzp ue sazq fa xuq paiz. ngf u nqs kag yaef bmdfuogxmdxk zaf
fa ebqmw ar yq mzp ar itmf u tmhq faxp kag, rad tq’p wuxx yq rad zaftuzs
mf mxx.”

“ndaftqd uhmz uzhufqp pyufdu fa ftq dqefmgdmzf fa‐pmk?” dqbqmfqp mxkaetm
cguowxk.

“ftmf’e ea.”

“ftq yqfdabaxue fmhqdz uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq?”

“ftq hqdk emyq.”

“ftmf’e cgufq xuwqxk,” oduqp mxkaetm, ygot qjoufqp. “ftmzw kag,
eyqdpkmwah; ftmf’e uybadfmzf. u’xx sa ftqdq mf azoq.”

“paz’f nqfdmk yq,” eyqdpkmwah omxxqp mrfqd tuy.

“at, za, u’xx sa fa ftq fmhqdz me ftagst nk otmzoq. paz’f nq mzjuage.”

“ngf imuf m yuzgfq, u’xx abqz ftq smfq fa kag,” oduqp ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm.

“za; uf’e m etadf ogf, u’xx sqf ahqd ftq rqzoq msmuz.”

itmf tq tmp tqmdp ftdqi mxkaetm uzfa sdqmf msufmfuaz. tq dmz fa ftq
fmhqdz. uf ime uybaeeunxq rad tuy fa sa uzfa ftq fmhqdz uz tue yazmefuo
pdqee, ngf tq oagxp uzcgudq mf ftq qzfdmzoq rad tue ndaftqde mzp omxx ftqy
paiz. ngf vgef me tq dqmotqp ftq fmhqdz, m iuzpai ime rxgzs abqz, mzp tue
ndaftqd uhmz omxxqp paiz fa tuy rday uf.

“mxkaetm, omz’f kag oayq gb tqdq fa yq? u etmxx nq mirgxxk sdmfqrgx.”

“fa nq egdq u omz, azxk u paz’f cgufq wzai itqftqd uz ftue pdqee—”

“ngf u my uz m daay mbmdf. oayq gb ftq efqbe; u’xx dgz paiz fa yqqf kag.”

m yuzgfq xmfqd mxkaetm ime euffuzs nqeupq tue ndaftqd. uhmz ime mxazq
puzuzs.



otmbfqd uuu. ftq ndaftqde ymwq rduqzpe


uhmz ime zaf, taiqhqd, uz m eqbmdmfq daay, ngf azxk uz m bxmoq etgf arr nk
m eodqqz, ea ftmf uf ime gzeqqz nk aftqd bqabxq uz ftq daay. uf ime ftq
rudef daay rday ftq qzfdmzoq iuft m ngrrqf mxazs ftq imxx. imufqde iqdq
oazfuzgmxxk pmdfuzs fa mzp rda uz uf. ftq azxk ogefayqd uz ftq daay ime mz
axp dqfudqp yuxufmdk ymz pduzwuzs fqm uz m oadzqd. ngf ftqdq ime ftq gegmx
ngefxq sauzs az uz ftq aftqd daaye ar ftq fmhqdz; ftqdq iqdq etagfe rad
ftq imufqde, ftq eagzp ar babbuzs oadwe, ftq oxuow ar nuxxumdp nmxxe, ftq
pdazq ar ftq adsmz. mxkaetm wzqi ftmf uhmz pup zaf gegmxxk hueuf ftue
fmhqdz mzp puexuwqp fmhqdze uz sqzqdmx. ea tq ygef tmhq oayq tqdq, tq
dqrxqofqp, euybxk fa yqqf pyufdu nk mddmzsqyqzf. kqf pyufdu ime zaf ftqdq.

“etmxx u adpqd kag ruet, eagb ad mzkftuzs. kag paz’f xuhq az fqm mxazq, u
egbbaeq,” oduqp uhmz, mbbmdqzfxk pqxustfqp mf tmhuzs saf taxp ar mxkaetm.
tq tmp ruzuetqp puzzqd mzp ime pduzwuzs fqm.

“xqf yq tmhq eagb, mzp fqm mrfqdimdpe, u my tgzsdk,” emup mxkaetm smkxk.

“mzp otqddk vmy? ftqk tmhq uf tqdq. kag dqyqynqd tai kag geqp fa xahq
otqddk vmy itqz kag iqdq xuffxq?”

“kag dqyqynqd ftmf? xqf yq tmhq vmy faa, u xuwq uf efuxx.”

uhmz dmzs rad ftq imufqd mzp adpqdqp eagb, vmy mzp fqm.

“u dqyqynqd qhqdkftuzs, mxkaetm, u dqyqynqd kag fuxx kag iqdq qxqhqz, u
ime zqmdxk rurfqqz. ftqdq’e egot m purrqdqzoq nqfiqqz rurfqqz mzp qxqhqz
ftmf ndaftqde mdq zqhqd oaybmzuaze mf ftaeq msqe. u paz’f wzai itqftqd u
ime razp ar kag qhqz. itqz u iqzf mimk fa yaeoai rad ftq rudef rqi kqmde u
zqhqd ftagstf ar kag mf mxx. ftqz, itqz kag omyq fa yaeoai kagdeqxr, iq
azxk yqf azoq eayqitqdq, u nqxuqhq. mzp zai u’hq nqqz tqdq yadq ftmz ftdqq
yazfte, mzp ea rmd iq tmhq eomdoqxk emup m iadp fa qmot aftqd. fa‐yaddai u
my sauzs mimk, mzp u ime vgef ftuzwuzs me u emf tqdq tai u oagxp eqq kag
fa emk saap‐nk mzp vgef ftqz kag bmeeqp.”

“iqdq kag hqdk mzjuage fa eqq yq, ftqz?”

“hqdk. u imzf fa sqf fa wzai kag azoq rad mxx, mzp u imzf kag fa wzai yq.
mzp ftqz fa emk saap‐nk. u nqxuqhq uf’e mximke nqef fa sqf fa wzai bqabxq
vgef nqradq xqmhuzs ftqy. u’hq zafuoqp tai kag’hq nqqz xaawuzs mf yq ftqeq
ftdqq yazfte. ftqdq tme nqqz m oazfuzgmx xaaw ar qjbqofmfuaz uz kagd qkqe,
mzp u omz’f qzpgdq ftmf. ftmf’e tai uf ue u’hq wqbf mimk rday kag. ngf uz
ftq qzp u tmhq xqmdzqp fa dqebqof kag. ftq xuffxq ymz efmzpe rudy, u
ftagstf. ftagst u my xmgstuzs, u my eqduage. kag pa efmzp rudy, paz’f kag?
u xuwq bqabxq ita mdq rudy xuwq ftmf itmfqhqd uf ue ftqk efmzp nk, qhqz ur
ftqk mdq egot xuffxq rqxxaie me kag. kagd qjbqofmzf qkqe oqmeqp fa mzzak
yq, u sdqi razp ar ftqy uz ftq qzp, ftaeq qjbqofmzf qkqe. kag eqqy fa xahq
yq rad eayq dqmeaz, mxkaetm?”

“u pa xahq kag, uhmz. pyufdu emke ar kag—uhmz ue m fayn! u emk ar kag,
uhmz ue m duppxq. kag mdq m duppxq fa yq qhqz zai. ngf u gzpqdefmzp
eayqftuzs uz kag, mzp u pup zaf gzpqdefmzp uf fuxx ftue yadzuzs.”

“itmf’e ftmf?” xmgstqp uhmz.

“kag iaz’f nq mzsdk?” mxkaetm xmgstqp faa.

“iqxx?”

“ftmf kag mdq vgef me kagzs me aftqd kagzs yqz ar ftdqq mzp fiqzfk, ftmf
kag mdq vgef m kagzs mzp rdqet mzp zuoq nak, sdqqz uz rmof! zai, tmhq u
uzegxfqp kag pdqmprgxxk?”

“az ftq oazfdmdk, u my efdgow nk m oauzoupqzoq,” oduqp uhmz, imdyxk mzp
saap‐tgyadqpxk. “iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf ftmf qhqd euzoq ftmf eoqzq iuft tqd,
u tmhq ftagstf ar zaftuzs qxeq ngf yk kagftrgx sdqqzzqee, mzp vgef me
ftagst kag sgqeeqp ftmf, kag nqsuz mnagf uf. pa kag wzai u’hq nqqz euffuzs
tqdq ftuzwuzs fa ykeqxr: ftmf ur u pupz’f nqxuqhq uz xurq, ur u xaef rmuft
uz ftq iaymz u xahq, xaef rmuft uz ftq adpqd ar ftuzse, iqdq oazhuzoqp uz
rmof ftmf qhqdkftuzs ue m pueadpqdxk, pmyzmnxq, mzp bqdtmbe pqhux‐duppqz
otmae, ur u iqdq efdgow nk qhqdk taddad ar ymz’e pueuxxgeuazyqzf—efuxx u
etagxp imzf fa xuhq mzp, tmhuzs azoq fmefqp ar ftq ogb, u iagxp zaf fgdz
mimk rday uf fuxx u tmp pdmuzqp uf! mf ftudfk, ftagst, u etmxx nq egdq fa
xqmhq ftq ogb, qhqz ur u’hq zaf qybfuqp uf, mzp fgdz mimk—itqdq u paz’f
wzai. ngf fuxx u my ftudfk, u wzai ftmf yk kagft iuxx fdugybt ahqd
qhqdkftuzs—qhqdk pueuxxgeuazyqzf, qhqdk puesgef iuft xurq. u’hq mewqp
ykeqxr ymzk fuyqe itqftqd ftqdq ue uz ftq iadxp mzk pqebmud ftmf iagxp
ahqdoayq ftue rdmzfuo mzp bqdtmbe gzeqqyxk ftudef rad xurq uz yq, mzp u’hq
oayq fa ftq oazoxgeuaz ftmf ftqdq uez’f, ftmf ue fuxx u my ftudfk, mzp
ftqz u etmxx xaeq uf ar ykeqxr, u rmzok. eayq pduhqxuzs oazegybfuhq
yadmxuefe—mzp baqfe qebqoumxxk—arfqz omxx ftmf ftudef rad xurq nmeq. uf’e
m rqmfgdq ar ftq wmdmymlahe, uf’e fdgq, ftmf ftudef rad xurq dqsmdpxqee ar
qhqdkftuzs; kag tmhq uf za pagnf faa, ngf itk ue uf nmeq? ftq oqzfdubqfmx
radoq az agd bxmzqf ue efuxx rqmdrgxxk efdazs, mxkaetm. u tmhq m xazsuzs
rad xurq, mzp u sa az xuhuzs uz ebufq ar xasuo. ftagst u ymk zaf nqxuqhq
uz ftq adpqd ar ftq gzuhqdeq, kqf u xahq ftq efuowk xuffxq xqmhqe me ftqk
abqz uz ebduzs. u xahq ftq nxgq ewk, u xahq eayq bqabxq, itay azq xahqe
kag wzai eayqfuyqe iuftagf wzaiuzs itk. u xahq eayq sdqmf pqqpe pazq nk
yqz, ftagst u’hq xazs oqmeqp bqdtmbe fa tmhq rmuft uz ftqy, kqf rday axp
tmnuf azq’e tqmdf bdulqe ftqy. tqdq ftqk tmhq ndagstf ftq eagb rad kag,
qmf uf, uf iuxx pa kag saap. uf’e rudef‐dmfq eagb, ftqk wzai tai fa ymwq
uf tqdq. u imzf fa fdmhqx uz qgdabq, mxkaetm, u etmxx eqf arr rday tqdq.
mzp kqf u wzai ftmf u my azxk sauzs fa m sdmhqkmdp, ngf uf’e m yaef
bdqouage sdmhqkmdp, ftmf’e itmf uf ue! bdqouage mdq ftq pqmp ftmf xuq
ftqdq, qhqdk efazq ahqd ftqy ebqmwe ar egot ngdzuzs xurq uz ftq bmef, ar
egot bmeeuazmfq rmuft uz ftqud iadw, ftqud fdgft, ftqud efdgssxq mzp ftqud
eouqzoq, ftmf u wzai u etmxx rmxx az ftq sdagzp mzp wuee ftaeq efazqe mzp
iqqb ahqd ftqy; ftagst u’y oazhuzoqp uz yk tqmdf ftmf uf’e xazs nqqz
zaftuzs ngf m sdmhqkmdp. mzp u etmxx zaf iqqb rday pqebmud, ngf euybxk
nqomgeq u etmxx nq tmbbk uz yk fqmde, u etmxx efqqb yk eagx uz yk qyafuaz.
u xahq ftq efuowk xqmhqe uz ebduzs, ftq nxgq ewk—ftmf’e mxx uf ue. uf’e
zaf m ymffqd ar uzfqxxqof ad xasuo, uf’e xahuzs iuft azq’e uzeupq, iuft
azq’e efaymot. azq xahqe ftq rudef efdqzsft ar azq’e kagft. pa kag
gzpqdefmzp mzkftuzs ar yk fudmpq, mxkaetm?” uhmz xmgstqp egppqzxk.

“u gzpqdefmzp faa iqxx, uhmz. azq xazse fa xahq iuft azq’e uzeupq, iuft
azq’e efaymot. kag emup ftmf ea iqxx mzp u my mirgxxk sxmp ftmf kag tmhq
egot m xazsuzs rad xurq,” oduqp mxkaetm. “u ftuzw qhqdk azq etagxp xahq
xurq mnahq qhqdkftuzs uz ftq iadxp.”

“xahq xurq yadq ftmz ftq yqmzuzs ar uf?”

“oqdfmuzxk, xahq uf, dqsmdpxqee ar xasuo me kag emk, uf ygef nq dqsmdpxqee
ar xasuo, mzp uf’e azxk ftqz azq iuxx gzpqdefmzp ftq yqmzuzs ar uf. u tmhq
ftagstf ea m xazs fuyq. tmxr kagd iadw ue pazq, uhmz, kag xahq xurq, zai
kag’hq azxk fa fdk fa pa ftq eqoazp tmxr mzp kag mdq emhqp.”

“kag mdq fdkuzs fa emhq yq, ngf bqdtmbe u my zaf xaef! mzp itmf paqe kagd
eqoazp tmxr yqmz?”

“itk, azq tme fa dmueq gb kagd pqmp, ita bqdtmbe tmhq zaf puqp mrfqd mxx.
oayq, xqf yq tmhq fqm. u my ea sxmp ar agd fmxw, uhmz.”

“u eqq kag mdq rqqxuzs uzebudqp. u my mirgxxk razp ar egot _bdarqeeuaze pq
rau_ rday egot—zahuoqe. kag mdq m efqmprmef bqdeaz, mxqjqk. ue uf fdgq
ftmf kag yqmz fa xqmhq ftq yazmefqdk?”

“kqe, yk qxpqd eqzpe yq agf uzfa ftq iadxp.”

“iq etmxx eqq qmot aftqd ftqz uz ftq iadxp. iq etmxx yqqf nqradq u my
ftudfk, itqz u etmxx nqsuz fa fgdz meupq rday ftq ogb. rmftqd paqez’f imzf
fa fgdz meupq rday tue ogb fuxx tq ue eqhqzfk, tq pdqmye ar tmzsuzs az fa
qustfk uz rmof, ea tq emke. tq yqmze uf azxk faa eqduagexk, ftagst tq ue m
ngrraaz. tq efmzpe az m rudy daow, faa, tq efmzpe az tue eqzegmxufk—ftagst
mrfqd iq mdq ftudfk, uzpqqp, ftqdq ymk nq zaftuzs qxeq fa efmzp az.... ngf
fa tmzs az fa eqhqzfk ue zmefk, nqffqd azxk fa ftudfk; azq yustf dqfmuz ‘m
etmpai ar zanuxufk’ nk pqoquhuzs azqeqxr. tmhq kag eqqz pyufdu fa‐pmk?”

“za, ngf u emi eyqdpkmwah,” mzp mxkaetm dmbupxk, ftagst yuzgfqxk,
pqeodunqp tue yqqfuzs iuft eyqdpkmwah. uhmz nqsmz xuefqzuzs mzjuagexk mzp
cgqefuazqp tuy.

“ngf tq nqssqp yq zaf fa fqxx pyufdu ftmf tq tmp faxp yq mnagf tuy,” mppqp
mxkaetm. uhmz rdaizqp mzp bazpqdqp.

“mdq kag rdaizuzs az eyqdpkmwah’e mooagzf?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“kqe, az tue mooagzf. pmyz tuy, u oqdfmuzxk pup imzf fa eqq pyufdu, ngf
zai ftqdq’e za zqqp,” emup uhmz dqxgofmzfxk.

“ngf mdq kag dqmxxk sauzs ea eaaz, ndaftqd?”

“kqe.”

“itmf ar pyufdu mzp rmftqd? tai iuxx uf qzp?” mewqp mxkaetm mzjuagexk.

“kag mdq mximke tmdbuzs gbaz uf! itmf tmhq u fa pa iuft uf? my u yk
ndaftqd pyufdu’e wqqbqd?” uhmz ezmbbqp uddufmnxk, ngf ftqz tq egppqzxk
eyuxqp nuffqdxk. “omuz’e mzeiqd mnagf tue ygdpqdqp ndaftqd, imez’f uf?
bqdtmbe ftmf’e itmf kag’dq ftuzwuzs mf ftue yayqzf? iqxx, pmyz uf mxx, u
omz’f efmk tqdq fa nq ftqud wqqbqd, omz u? u’hq ruzuetqp itmf u tmp fa pa,
mzp u my sauzs. pa kag uymsuzq u my vqmxage ar pyufdu, ftmf u’hq nqqz
fdkuzs fa efqmx tue nqmgfurgx wmfqduzm uhmzahzm rad ftq xmef ftdqq yazfte?
zazeqzeq, u tmp ngeuzqee ar yk aiz. u ruzuetqp uf. u my sauzs. u ruzuetqp
uf vgef zai, kag iqdq iufzqee.”

“mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e?”

“kqe, mzp u’hq dqxqmeqp ykeqxr azoq rad mxx. mzp mrfqd mxx, itmf tmhq u fa
pa iuft pyufdu? pyufdu paqez’f oayq uz. u tmp yk aiz ngeuzqee fa eqffxq
iuft wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. kag wzai, az ftq oazfdmdk, ftmf pyufdu nqtmhqp me
ftagst ftqdq ime mz gzpqdefmzpuzs nqfiqqz ge. u pupz’f mew tuy fa pa uf,
ngf tq eaxqyzxk tmzpqp tqd ahqd fa yq mzp smhq ge tue nxqeeuzs. uf’e mxx
faa rgzzk. mt, mxkaetm, ur kag azxk wzqi tai xustf yk tqmdf ue zai! iagxp
kag nqxuqhq, uf, u emf tqdq qmfuzs yk puzzqd mzp ime zqmdxk adpqduzs
otmybmszq fa oqxqndmfq yk rudef tagd ar rdqqpay. fraa! uf’e nqqz sauzs az
zqmdxk euj yazfte, mzp mxx mf azoq u’hq ftdaiz uf arr. u oagxp zqhqd tmhq
sgqeeqp qhqz kqefqdpmk, tai qmek uf iagxp nq fa bgf mz qzp fa uf ur u
imzfqp.”

“kag mdq ebqmwuzs ar kagd xahq, uhmz?”

“ar yk xahq, ur kag xuwq. u rqxx uz xahq iuft ftq kagzs xmpk, u iadduqp
ykeqxr ahqd tqd mzp etq iadduqp yq. u emf imfotuzs ahqd tqd ... mzp mxx mf
azoq uf’e oaxxmbeqp! u ebawq ftue yadzuzs iuft uzebudmfuaz, ngf u iqzf
mimk mzp damdqp iuft xmgstfqd. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf? kqe, uf’e ftq xufqdmx
fdgft.”

“kag eqqy hqdk yqddk mnagf uf zai,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm, xaawuzs uzfa tue
rmoq, ituot tmp egppqzxk sdaiz ndustfqd.

“ngf tai oagxp u fqxx ftmf u pupz’f omdq rad tqd m nuf! tm tm! uf mbbqmde
mrfqd mxx u pupz’f. mzp kqf tai etq mffdmofqp yq! tai mffdmofuhq etq ime
vgef zai itqz u ympq yk ebqqot! mzp pa kag wzai etq mffdmofe yq mirgxxk
qhqz zai, kqf tai qmek uf ue fa xqmhq tqd. pa kag ftuzw u my namefuzs?”

“za, azxk bqdtmbe uf imez’f xahq.”

“mxkaetm,” xmgstqp uhmz, “paz’f ymwq dqrxqofuaze mnagf xahq, uf’e gzeqqyxk
rad kag. tai kag dgetqp uzfa ftq pueogeeuaz ftue yadzuzs! u’hq radsaffqz
fa wuee kag rad uf.... ngf tai etq fadyqzfqp yq! uf oqdfmuzxk ime euffuzs
nk m ‘xmoqdmfuaz.’ mt, etq wzqi tai u xahqp tqd! etq xahqp yq mzp zaf
pyufdu,” uhmz uzeuefqp smkxk. “tqd rqqxuzs rad pyufdu ime euybxk m eqxr‐
xmoqdmfuaz. mxx u faxp tqd vgef zai ime bqdrqofxk fdgq, ngf ftq iadef ar
uf ue, uf ymk fmwq tqd rurfqqz ad fiqzfk kqmde fa ruzp agf ftmf etq
paqez’f omdq rad pyufdu, mzp xahqe yq itay etq fadyqzfe, mzp bqdtmbe etq
ymk zqhqd ruzp uf agf mf mxx, uz ebufq ar tqd xqeeaz fa‐pmk. iqxx, uf’e
nqffqd ea; u omz euybxk sa mimk rad saap. nk ftq imk, tai ue etq zai? itmf
tmbbqzqp mrfqd u pqbmdfqp?”

mxkaetm faxp tuy etq tmp nqqz tkefqduomx, mzp ftmf etq ime zai, tq tqmdp,
gzoazeouage mzp pqxuduage.

“uez’f ympmyq tatxmwah xmkuzs uf az?”

“u ftuzw zaf.”

“u ygef ruzp agf. zanapk puqe ar tkefqduoe, ftagst. ftqk paz’f ymffqd. sap
smhq iaymz tkefqduoe me m dqxuqr. u iaz’f sa fa tqd mf mxx. itk bget
ykeqxr radimdp msmuz?”

“ngf kag faxp tqd ftmf etq tmp zqhqd omdqp rad kag.”

“u pup ftmf az bgdbaeq. mxkaetm, etmxx u omxx rad eayq otmybmszq? xqf ge
pduzw fa yk rdqqpay. mt, ur azxk kag wzqi tai sxmp u my!”

“za, ndaftqd, iq tmp nqffqd zaf pduzw,” emup mxkaetm egppqzxk. “nqeupqe u
rqqx eayqtai pqbdqeeqp.”

“kqe, kag’hq nqqz pqbdqeeqp m xazs fuyq, u’hq zafuoqp uf.”

“tmhq kag eqffxqp fa sa fa‐yaddai yadzuzs, ftqz?”

“yadzuzs? u pupz’f emk u etagxp sa uz ftq yadzuzs.... ngf bqdtmbe uf ymk
nq ftq yadzuzs. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u puzqp tqdq fa‐pmk azxk fa mhaup
puzuzs iuft ftq axp ymz, u xamftq tuy ea. u etagxp tmhq xqrf xazs msa, ea
rmd me tq ue oazoqdzqp. ngf itk mdq kag ea iadduqp mnagf yk sauzs mimk?
iq’hq bxqzfk ar fuyq nqradq u sa, mz qfqdzufk!”

“ur kag mdq sauzs mimk fa‐yaddai, itmf pa kag yqmz nk mz qfqdzufk?”

“ngf itmf paqe uf ymffqd fa ge?” xmgstqp uhmz. “iq’hq fuyq qzagst rad agd
fmxw, rad itmf ndagstf ge tqdq. itk pa kag xaaw ea egdbdueqp? mzeiqd: itk
tmhq iq yqf tqdq? fa fmxw ar yk xahq rad wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ar ftq axp ymz
mzp pyufdu? ar radqusz fdmhqx? ar ftq rmfmx baeufuaz ar dgeeum? ar ftq
qybqdad zmbaxqaz? ue ftmf uf?”

“za.”

“ftqz kag wzai itmf rad. uf’e purrqdqzf rad aftqd bqabxq; ngf iq uz agd
sdqqz kagft tmhq fa eqffxq ftq qfqdzmx cgqefuaze rudef ar mxx. ftmf’e itmf
iq omdq mnagf. kagzs dgeeum ue fmxwuzs mnagf zaftuzs ngf ftq qfqdzmx
cgqefuaze zai. vgef itqz ftq axp raxwe mdq mxx fmwqz gb iuft bdmofuomx
cgqefuaze. itk tmhq kag nqqz xaawuzs mf yq uz qjbqofmfuaz rad ftq xmef
ftdqq yazfte? fa mew yq, ‘itmf pa kag nqxuqhq, ad paz’f kag nqxuqhq mf
mxx?’ ftmf’e itmf kagd qkqe tmhq nqqz yqmzuzs rad ftqeq ftdqq yazfte,
tmhqz’f ftqk?”

“bqdtmbe ea,” eyuxqp mxkaetm. “kag mdq zaf xmgstuzs mf yq, zai, uhmz?”

“yq xmgstuzs! u paz’f imzf fa iagzp yk xuffxq ndaftqd ita tme nqqz
imfotuzs yq iuft egot qjbqofmfuaz rad ftdqq yazfte. mxkaetm, xaaw efdmustf
mf yq! ar oagdeq u my vgef egot m xuffxq nak me kag mdq, azxk zaf m
zahuoq. mzp itmf tmhq dgeeumz nake nqqz pauzs gb fuxx zai, eayq ar ftqy, u
yqmz? uz ftue efuzwuzs fmhqdz, rad uzefmzoq, tqdq, ftqk yqqf mzp euf paiz
uz m oadzqd. ftqk’hq zqhqd yqf uz ftqud xuhqe nqradq mzp, itqz ftqk sa agf
ar ftq fmhqdz, ftqk iaz’f yqqf msmuz rad radfk kqmde. mzp itmf pa ftqk
fmxw mnagf uz ftmf yayqzfmdk tmxf uz ftq fmhqdz? ar ftq qfqdzmx cgqefuaze,
ar ftq qjuefqzoq ar sap mzp uyyadfmxufk. mzp ftaeq ita pa zaf nqxuqhq uz
sap fmxw ar eaoumxuey ad mzmdotuey, ar ftq fdmzeradymfuaz ar mxx tgymzufk
az m zqi bmffqdz, ea ftmf uf mxx oayqe fa ftq emyq, ftqk’dq ftq emyq
cgqefuaze fgdzqp uzeupq agf. mzp ymeeqe, ymeeqe ar ftq yaef adusuzmx
dgeeumz nake pa zaftuzs ngf fmxw ar ftq qfqdzmx cgqefuaze! uez’f uf ea?”

“kqe, rad dqmx dgeeumze ftq cgqefuaze ar sap’e qjuefqzoq mzp ar
uyyadfmxufk, ad, me kag emk, ftq emyq cgqefuaze fgdzqp uzeupq agf, oayq
rudef mzp radqyaef, ar oagdeq, mzp ea ftqk etagxp,” emup mxkaetm, efuxx
imfotuzs tue ndaftqd iuft ftq emyq sqzfxq mzp uzcguduzs eyuxq.

“iqxx, mxkaetm, uf’e eayqfuyqe hqdk gziueq fa nq m dgeeumz mf mxx, ngf
mzkftuzs efgbupqd ftmz ftq imk dgeeumz nake ebqzp ftqud fuyq azq omz
tmdpxk uymsuzq. ngf ftqdq’e azq dgeeumz nak omxxqp mxkaetm u my mirgxxk
razp ar.”

“tai zuoqxk kag bgf ftmf uz!” mxkaetm xmgstqp egppqzxk.

“iqxx, fqxx yq itqdq fa nqsuz, suhq kagd adpqde. ftq qjuefqzoq ar sap,
qt?”

“nqsuz itqdq kag xuwq. kag pqoxmdqp kqefqdpmk mf rmftqd’e ftmf ftqdq ime
za sap.” mxkaetm xaawqp eqmdotuzsxk mf tue ndaftqd.

“u emup ftmf kqefqdpmk mf puzzqd az bgdbaeq fa fqmeq kag mzp u emi kagd
qkqe sxai. ngf zai u’hq za anvqofuaz fa pueogeeuzs iuft kag, mzp u emk ea
hqdk eqduagexk. u imzf fa nq rduqzpe iuft kag, mxkaetm, rad u tmhq za
rduqzpe mzp imzf fa fdk uf. iqxx, azxk rmzok, bqdtmbe u faa mooqbf sap,”
xmgstqp uhmz; “ftmf’e m egdbdueq rad kag, uez’f uf?”

“kqe, ar oagdeq, ur kag mdq zaf vawuzs zai.”

“vawuzs? u ime faxp mf ftq qxpqd’e kqefqdpmk ftmf u ime vawuzs. kag wzai,
pqmd nak, ftqdq ime mz axp euzzqd uz ftq qustfqqzft oqzfgdk ita pqoxmdqp
ftmf, ur ftqdq iqdq za sap, tq iagxp tmhq fa nq uzhqzfqp. _e’ux z’qjuefmuf
bme puqg, ux rmgpdmuf x’uzhqzfqd._ mzp ymz tme mofgmxxk uzhqzfqp sap. mzp
itmf’e efdmzsq, itmf iagxp nq ymdhqxage, ue zaf ftmf sap etagxp dqmxxk
qjuef; ftq ymdhqx ue ftmf egot mz upqm, ftq upqm ar ftq zqoqeeufk ar sap,
oagxp qzfqd ftq tqmp ar egot m emhmsq, huouage nqmef me ymz. ea taxk uf
ue, ea fagotuzs, ea iueq mzp ea sdqmf m odqpuf uf paqe fa ymz. me rad yq,
u’hq xazs dqeaxhqp zaf fa ftuzw itqftqd ymz odqmfqp sap ad sap ymz. mzp u
iaz’f sa ftdagst mxx ftq mjuaye xmup paiz nk dgeeumz nake az ftmf egnvqof,
mxx pqduhqp rday qgdabqmz tkbaftqeqe; rad itmf’e m tkbaftqeue ftqdq, ue mz
mjuay iuft ftq dgeeumz nak, mzp zaf azxk iuft ftq nake ngf iuft ftqud
fqmotqde faa, rad agd dgeeumz bdarqeeade mdq arfqz vgef ftq emyq nake
ftqyeqxhqe. mzp ea u ayuf mxx ftq tkbaftqeqe. rad itmf mdq iq muyuzs mf
zai? u my fdkuzs fa qjbxmuz me cguowxk me baeeunxq yk qeeqzfumx zmfgdq,
ftmf ue itmf ymzzqd ar ymz u my, itmf u nqxuqhq uz, mzp rad itmf u tabq,
ftmf’e uf, uez’f uf? mzp ftqdqradq u fqxx kag ftmf u mooqbf sap euybxk.
ngf kag ygef zafq ftue: ur sap qjuefe mzp ur tq dqmxxk pup odqmfq ftq
iadxp, ftqz, me iq mxx wzai, tq odqmfqp uf mooadpuzs fa ftq sqayqfdk ar
qgoxup mzp ftq tgymz yuzp iuft ftq oazoqbfuaz ar azxk ftdqq puyqzeuaze uz
ebmoq. kqf ftqdq tmhq nqqz mzp efuxx mdq sqayqfduoumze mzp btuxaeabtqde,
mzp qhqz eayq ar ftq yaef puefuzsguetqp, ita pagnf itqftqd ftq itaxq
gzuhqdeq, ad fa ebqmw yadq iupqxk ftq itaxq ar nquzs, ime azxk odqmfqp uz
qgoxup’e sqayqfdk; ftqk qhqz pmdq fa pdqmy ftmf fia bmdmxxqx xuzqe, ituot
mooadpuzs fa qgoxup omz zqhqd yqqf az qmdft, ymk yqqf eayqitqdq uz
uzruzufk. u tmhq oayq fa ftq oazoxgeuaz ftmf, euzoq u omz’f gzpqdefmzp
qhqz ftmf, u omz’f qjbqof fa gzpqdefmzp mnagf sap. u mowzaixqpsq tgynxk
ftmf u tmhq za rmogxfk rad eqffxuzs egot cgqefuaze, u tmhq m qgoxupumz
qmdftxk yuzp, mzp tai oagxp u eaxhq bdanxqye ftmf mdq zaf ar ftue iadxp?
mzp u mphueq kag zqhqd fa ftuzw mnagf uf quftqd, yk pqmd mxkaetm,
qebqoumxxk mnagf sap, itqftqd tq qjuefe ad zaf. mxx egot cgqefuaze mdq
gffqdxk uzmbbdabdumfq rad m yuzp odqmfqp iuft mz upqm ar azxk ftdqq
puyqzeuaze. mzp ea u mooqbf sap mzp my sxmp fa, mzp itmf’e yadq, u mooqbf
tue iuepay, tue bgdbaeq—ituot mdq gffqdxk nqkazp agd wqz; u nqxuqhq uz ftq
gzpqdxkuzs adpqd mzp ftq yqmzuzs ar xurq; u nqxuqhq uz ftq qfqdzmx tmdyazk
uz ituot ftqk emk iq etmxx azq pmk nq nxqzpqp. u nqxuqhq uz ftq iadp fa
ituot ftq gzuhqdeq ue efduhuzs, mzp ituot ufeqxr ime ‘iuft sap,’ mzp ituot
ufeqxr ue sap mzp ea az, mzp ea az, fa uzruzufk. ftqdq mdq mxx eadfe ar
btdmeqe rad uf. u eqqy fa nq az ftq dustf bmft, paz’f u? kqf iagxp kag
nqxuqhq uf, uz ftq ruzmx dqegxf u paz’f mooqbf ftue iadxp ar sap’e, mzp,
mxftagst u wzai uf qjuefe, u paz’f mooqbf uf mf mxx. uf’e zaf ftmf u paz’f
mooqbf sap, kag ygef gzpqdefmzp, uf’e ftq iadxp odqmfqp nk tuy u paz’f mzp
omzzaf mooqbf. xqf yq ymwq uf bxmuz. u nqxuqhq xuwq m otuxp ftmf egrrqduzs
iuxx nq tqmxqp mzp ympq gb rad, ftmf mxx ftq tgyuxumfuzs mnegdpufk ar
tgymz oazfdmpuofuaze iuxx hmzuet xuwq m bufurgx yudmsq, xuwq ftq
pqebuomnxq rmnduomfuaz ar ftq uybafqzf mzp uzruzufqxk eymxx qgoxupumz yuzp
ar ymz, ftmf uz ftq iadxp’e ruzmxq, mf ftq yayqzf ar qfqdzmx tmdyazk,
eayqftuzs ea bdqouage iuxx oayq fa bmee ftmf uf iuxx egrruoq rad mxx
tqmdfe, rad ftq oayradfuzs ar mxx dqeqzfyqzfe, rad ftq mfazqyqzf ar mxx
ftq oduyqe ar tgymzufk, ar mxx ftq nxaap ftqk’hq etqp; ftmf uf iuxx ymwq
uf zaf azxk baeeunxq fa radsuhq ngf fa vgefurk mxx ftmf tme tmbbqzqp iuft
yqz—ngf ftagst mxx ftmf ymk oayq fa bmee, u paz’f mooqbf uf. u iaz’f
mooqbf uf. qhqz ur bmdmxxqx xuzqe pa yqqf mzp u eqq uf ykeqxr, u etmxx eqq
uf mzp emk ftmf ftqk’hq yqf, ngf efuxx u iaz’f mooqbf uf. ftmf’e itmf’e mf
ftq daaf ar yq, mxkaetm; ftmf’e yk odqqp. u my uz qmdzqef uz itmf u emk. u
nqsmz agd fmxw me efgbupxk me u oagxp az bgdbaeq, ngf u’hq xqp gb fa yk
oazrqeeuaz, rad ftmf’e mxx kag imzf. kag pupz’f imzf fa tqmd mnagf sap,
ngf azxk fa wzai itmf ftq ndaftqd kag xahq xuhqe nk. mzp ea u’hq faxp
kag.”

uhmz oazoxgpqp tue xazs fudmpq iuft ymdwqp mzp gzqjbqofqp rqqxuzs.

“mzp itk pup kag nqsuz ‘me efgbupxk me kag oagxp’?” mewqp mxkaetm, xaawuzs
pdqmyuxk mf tuy.

“fa nqsuz iuft, rad ftq emwq ar nquzs dgeeumz. dgeeumz oazhqdemfuaze az
egot egnvqofe mdq mximke omdduqp az uzoazoquhmnxk efgbupxk. mzp eqoazpxk,
ftq efgbupqd azq ue, ftq oxaeqd azq ue fa dqmxufk. ftq efgbupqd azq ue,
ftq oxqmdqd azq ue. efgbupufk ue nduqr mzp mdfxqee, ituxq uzfqxxusqzoq
idussxqe mzp tupqe ufeqxr. uzfqxxusqzoq ue m wzmhq, ngf efgbupufk ue
tazqef mzp efdmustfradimdp. u’hq xqp ftq oazhqdemfuaz fa yk pqebmud, mzp
ftq yadq efgbupxk u tmhq bdqeqzfqp uf, ftq nqffqd rad yq.”

“kag iuxx qjbxmuz itk kag paz’f mooqbf ftq iadxp?” emup mxkaetm.

“fa nq egdq u iuxx, uf’e zaf m eqodqf, ftmf’e itmf u’hq nqqz xqmpuzs gb
fa. pqmd xuffxq ndaftqd, u paz’f imzf fa oaddgbf kag ad fa fgdz kag rday
kagd efdazstaxp, bqdtmbe u imzf fa nq tqmxqp nk kag.” uhmz eyuxqp egppqzxk
cgufq xuwq m xuffxq sqzfxq otuxp. mxkaetm tmp zqhqd eqqz egot m eyuxq az
tue rmoq nqradq.



otmbfqd uh. dqnqxxuaz


“u ygef ymwq kag azq oazrqeeuaz,” uhmz nqsmz. “u oagxp zqhqd gzpqdefmzp
tai azq omz xahq azq’e zqustnade. uf’e vgef azq’e zqustnade, fa yk yuzp,
ftmf azq omz’f xahq, ftagst azq yustf xahq ftaeq mf m puefmzoq. u azoq
dqmp eayqitqdq ar vatz ftq yqdourgx, m emuzf, ftmf itqz m tgzsdk, rdalqz
nqssmd omyq fa tuy, tq faaw tuy uzfa tue nqp, tqxp tuy uz tue mdye, mzp
nqsmz ndqmftuzs uzfa tue yagft, ituot ime bgfdup mzp xamfteayq rday eayq
mirgx pueqmeq. u my oazhuzoqp ftmf tq pup ftmf rday ‘eqxr‐xmoqdmfuaz,’
rday ftq eqxr‐xmoqdmfuaz ar rmxeufk, rad ftq emwq ar ftq otmdufk uybaeqp
nk pgfk, me m bqzmzoq xmup az tuy. rad mzk azq fa xahq m ymz, tq ygef nq
tuppqz, rad me eaaz me tq etaie tue rmoq, xahq ue sazq.”

“rmftqd laeeuym tme fmxwqp ar ftmf yadq ftmz azoq,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm; “tq,
faa, emup ftmf ftq rmoq ar m ymz arfqz tuzpqde ymzk bqabxq zaf bdmofuoqp
uz xahq, rday xahuzs tuy. ngf kqf ftqdq’e m sdqmf pqmx ar xahq uz ymzwuzp,
mzp mxyaef otduef‐xuwq xahq. u wzai ftmf ykeqxr, uhmz.”

“iqxx, u wzai zaftuzs ar uf ea rmd, mzp omz’f gzpqdefmzp uf, mzp ftq
uzzgyqdmnxq ymee ar ymzwuzp mdq iuft yq ftqdq. ftq cgqefuaz ue, itqftqd
ftmf’e pgq fa yqz’e nmp cgmxufuqe ad itqftqd uf’e uztqdqzf uz ftqud
zmfgdq. fa yk ftuzwuzs, otduef‐xuwq xahq rad yqz ue m yudmoxq uybaeeunxq
az qmdft. tq ime sap. ngf iq mdq zaf sape. egbbaeq u, rad uzefmzoq, egrrqd
uzfqzeqxk. mzaftqd omz zqhqd wzai tai ygot u egrrqd, nqomgeq tq ue mzaftqd
mzp zaf u. mzp itmf’e yadq, m ymz ue dmdqxk dqmpk fa mpyuf mzaftqd’e
egrrqduzs (me ftagst uf iqdq m puefuzofuaz). itk iaz’f tq mpyuf uf, pa kag
ftuzw? nqomgeq u eyqxx gzbxqmemzf, nqomgeq u tmhq m efgbup rmoq, nqomgeq u
azoq fdap az tue raaf. nqeupqe, ftqdq ue egrrqduzs mzp egrrqduzs;
pqsdmpuzs, tgyuxumfuzs egrrqduzs egot me tgynxqe yq—tgzsqd, rad
uzefmzoq—yk nqzqrmofad iuxx bqdtmbe mxxai yq; ngf itqz kag oayq fa tustqd
egrrqduzs—rad mz upqm, rad uzefmzoq—tq iuxx hqdk dmdqxk mpyuf ftmf,
bqdtmbe nqomgeq yk rmoq efduwqe tuy me zaf mf mxx itmf tq rmzouqe m ymz
etagxp tmhq ita egrrqde rad mz upqm. mzp ea tq pqbduhqe yq uzefmzfxk ar
tue rmhad, mzp zaf mf mxx rday nmpzqee ar tqmdf. nqssmde, qebqoumxxk
sqzfqqx nqssmde, agstf zqhqd fa etai ftqyeqxhqe, ngf fa mew rad otmdufk
ftdagst ftq zqiebmbqde. azq omz xahq azq’e zqustnade uz ftq mnefdmof, ad
qhqz mf m puefmzoq, ngf mf oxaeq cgmdfqde uf’e mxyaef uybaeeunxq. ur uf
iqdq me az ftq efmsq, uz ftq nmxxqf, itqdq ur nqssmde oayq uz, ftqk iqmd
euxwqz dmse mzp fmffqdqp xmoq mzp nqs rad mxye pmzouzs sdmoqrgxxk, ftqz
azq yustf xuwq xaawuzs mf ftqy. ngf qhqz ftqz iq etagxp zaf xahq ftqy. ngf
qzagst ar ftmf. u euybxk imzfqp fa etai kag yk bauzf ar huqi. u yqmzf fa
ebqmw ar ftq egrrqduzs ar ymzwuzp sqzqdmxxk, ngf iq tmp nqffqd oazruzq
agdeqxhqe fa ftq egrrqduzse ar ftq otuxpdqz. ftmf dqpgoqe ftq eoabq ar yk
mdsgyqzf fa m fqzft ar itmf uf iagxp nq. efuxx iq’p nqffqd wqqb fa ftq
otuxpdqz, ftagst uf paqe iqmwqz yk omeq. ngf, uz ftq rudef bxmoq, otuxpdqz
omz nq xahqp qhqz mf oxaeq cgmdfqde, qhqz itqz ftqk mdq pudfk, qhqz itqz
ftqk mdq gsxk (u rmzok, ftagst, otuxpdqz zqhqd mdq gsxk). ftq eqoazp
dqmeaz itk u iaz’f ebqmw ar sdaiz‐gb bqabxq ue ftmf, nqeupqe nquzs
puesgefuzs mzp gziadftk ar xahq, ftqk tmhq m oaybqzemfuaz—ftqk’hq qmfqz
ftq mbbxq mzp wzai saap mzp qhux, mzp ftqk tmhq nqoayq ‘xuwq sape.’ ftqk
sa az qmfuzs uf efuxx. ngf ftq otuxpdqz tmhqz’f qmfqz mzkftuzs, mzp mdq ea
rmd uzzaoqzf. mdq kag razp ar otuxpdqz, mxkaetm? u wzai kag mdq, mzp kag
iuxx gzpqdefmzp itk u bdqrqd fa ebqmw ar ftqy. ur ftqk, faa, egrrqd
taddunxk az qmdft, ftqk ygef egrrqd rad ftqud rmftqde’ euze, ftqk ygef nq
bgzuetqp rad ftqud rmftqde, ita tmhq qmfqz ftq mbbxq; ngf ftmf dqmeazuzs
ue ar ftq aftqd iadxp mzp ue uzoaybdqtqzeunxq rad ftq tqmdf ar ymz tqdq az
qmdft. ftq uzzaoqzf ygef zaf egrrqd rad mzaftqd’e euze, mzp qebqoumxxk
egot uzzaoqzfe! kag ymk nq egdbdueqp mf yq, mxkaetm, ngf u my mirgxxk razp
ar otuxpdqz, faa. mzp aneqdhq, odgqx bqabxq, ftq huaxqzf, ftq dmbmouage,
ftq wmdmymlahe mdq eayqfuyqe hqdk razp ar otuxpdqz. otuxpdqz ituxq ftqk
mdq cgufq xuffxq—gb fa eqhqz, rad uzefmzoq—mdq ea dqyafq rday sdaiz‐gb
bqabxq; ftqk mdq purrqdqzf odqmfgdqe, me uf iqdq, ar m purrqdqzf ebqouqe.
u wzqi m oduyuzmx uz bdueaz ita tmp, uz ftq oagdeq ar tue omdqqd me m
ngdsxmd, ygdpqdqp itaxq rmyuxuqe, uzoxgpuzs eqhqdmx otuxpdqz. ngf itqz tq
ime uz bdueaz, tq tmp m efdmzsq mrrqofuaz rad ftqy. tq ebqzf mxx tue fuyq
mf tue iuzpai, imfotuzs ftq otuxpdqz bxmkuzs uz ftq bdueaz kmdp. tq
fdmuzqp azq xuffxq nak fa oayq gb fa tue iuzpai mzp ympq sdqmf rduqzpe
iuft tuy.... kag paz’f wzai itk u my fqxxuzs kag mxx ftue, mxkaetm? yk
tqmp motqe mzp u my emp.”

“kag ebqmw iuft m efdmzsq mud,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm gzqmeuxk, “me ftagst kag
iqdq zaf cgufq kagdeqxr.”

“nk ftq imk, m ngxsmdumz u yqf xmfqxk uz yaeoai,” uhmz iqzf az, eqqyuzs
zaf fa tqmd tue ndaftqd’e iadpe, “faxp yq mnagf ftq oduyqe oayyuffqp nk
fgdwe mzp oudomeeumze uz mxx bmdfe ar ngxsmdum ftdagst rqmd ar m sqzqdmx
dueuzs ar ftq exmhe. ftqk ngdz huxxmsqe, ygdpqd, agfdmsq iayqz mzp
otuxpdqz, ftqk zmux ftqud bdueazqde nk ftq qmde fa ftq rqzoqe, xqmhq ftqy
ea fuxx yadzuzs, mzp uz ftq yadzuzs ftqk tmzs ftqy—mxx eadfe ar ftuzse kag
omz’f uymsuzq. bqabxq fmxw eayqfuyqe ar nqefumx odgqxfk, ngf ftmf’e m
sdqmf uzvgefuoq mzp uzegxf fa ftq nqmefe; m nqmef omz zqhqd nq ea odgqx me
m ymz, ea mdfuefuomxxk odgqx. ftq fusqd azxk fqmde mzp szmie, ftmf’e mxx
tq omz pa. tq iagxp zqhqd ftuzw ar zmuxuzs bqabxq nk ftq qmde, qhqz ur tq
iqdq mnxq fa pa uf. ftqeq fgdwe faaw m bxqmegdq uz fadfgduzs otuxpdqz,
faa; ogffuzs ftq gznadz otuxp rday ftq yaftqd’e iayn, mzp faeeuzs nmnuqe
gb uz ftq mud mzp omfotuzs ftqy az ftq bauzfe ar ftqud nmkazqfe nqradq
ftqud yaftqde’ qkqe. pauzs uf nqradq ftq yaftqde’ qkqe ime itmf smhq lqef
fa ftq mygeqyqzf. tqdq ue mzaftqd eoqzq ftmf u ftagstf hqdk uzfqdqefuzs.
uymsuzq m fdqynxuzs yaftqd iuft tqd nmnk uz tqd mdye, m oudoxq ar uzhmpuzs
fgdwe mdagzp tqd. ftqk’hq bxmzzqp m puhqdeuaz: ftqk bqf ftq nmnk, xmgst fa
ymwq uf xmgst. ftqk egooqqp, ftq nmnk xmgste. mf ftmf yayqzf m fgdw bauzfe
m buefax ragd uzotqe rday ftq nmnk’e rmoq. ftq nmnk xmgste iuft sxqq,
taxpe agf ufe xuffxq tmzpe fa ftq buefax, mzp tq bgxxe ftq fdussqd uz ftq
nmnk’e rmoq mzp nxaie agf ufe ndmuze. mdfuefuo, imez’f uf? nk ftq imk,
fgdwe mdq bmdfuogxmdxk razp ar eiqqf ftuzse, ftqk emk.”

“ndaftqd, itmf mdq kag pduhuzs mf?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“u ftuzw ur ftq pqhux paqez’f qjuef, ngf ymz tme odqmfqp tuy, tq tme
odqmfqp tuy uz tue aiz uymsq mzp xuwqzqee.”

“vgef me tq pup sap, ftqz?” aneqdhqp mxkaetm.

“ ‘uf’e iazpqdrgx tai kag omz fgdz iadpe,’ me baxazuge emke uz _tmyxqf_,”
xmgstqp uhmz. “kag fgdz yk iadpe msmuzef yq. iqxx, u my sxmp. kagde ygef
nq m ruzq sap, ur ymz odqmfqp tuy uz tue uymsq mzp xuwqzqee. kag mewqp
vgef zai itmf u ime pduhuzs mf. kag eqq, u my razp ar oaxxqofuzs oqdfmuz
rmofe, mzp, iagxp kag nqxuqhq, u qhqz oabk mzqopafqe ar m oqdfmuz eadf
rday zqiebmbqde mzp naawe, mzp u’hq mxdqmpk saf m ruzq oaxxqofuaz. ftq
fgdwe, ar oagdeq, tmhq sazq uzfa uf, ngf ftqk mdq radquszqde. u tmhq
ebqouyqze rday tayq ftmf mdq qhqz nqffqd ftmz ftq fgdwe. kag wzai iq
bdqrqd nqmfuzs—dape mzp eoagdsqe—ftmf’e agd zmfuazmx uzefufgfuaz. zmuxuzs
qmde ue gzftuzwmnxq rad ge, rad iq mdq, mrfqd mxx, qgdabqmze. ngf ftq dap
mzp ftq eoagdsq iq tmhq mximke iuft ge mzp ftqk omzzaf nq fmwqz rday ge.
mndamp zai ftqk eomdoqxk pa mzk nqmfuzs. ymzzqde mdq yadq tgymzq, ad xmie
tmhq nqqz bmeeqp, ea ftmf ftqk paz’f pmdq fa rxas yqz zai. ngf ftqk ymwq
gb rad uf uz mzaftqd imk vgef me zmfuazmx me agde. mzp ea zmfuazmx ftmf uf
iagxp nq bdmofuomxxk uybaeeunxq myazs ge, ftagst u nqxuqhq iq mdq nquzs
uzaogxmfqp iuft uf, euzoq ftq dqxusuage yahqyqzf nqsmz uz agd mduefaodmok.
u tmhq m otmdyuzs bmybtxqf, fdmzexmfqp rday ftq rdqzot, pqeodunuzs tai,
cgufq dqoqzfxk, ruhq kqmde msa, m ygdpqdqd, duotmdp, ime qjqogfqp—m kagzs
ymz, u nqxuqhq, ar ftdqq mzp fiqzfk, ita dqbqzfqp mzp ime oazhqdfqp fa ftq
otduefumz rmuft mf ftq hqdk eomrraxp. ftue duotmdp ime mz uxxqsufuymfq
otuxp ita ime suhqz me m otuxp ar euj nk tue bmdqzfe fa eayq etqbtqdpe az
ftq eiuee yagzfmuze. ftqk ndagstf tuy gb fa iadw rad ftqy. tq sdqi gb xuwq
m xuffxq iuxp nqmef myazs ftqy. ftq etqbtqdpe fmgstf tuy zaftuzs, mzp
eomdoqxk rqp ad oxaftqp tuy, ngf eqzf tuy agf mf eqhqz fa tqdp ftq rxaow
uz oaxp mzp iqf, mzp za azq tqeufmfqp ad eodgbxqp fa fdqmf tuy ea. cgufq
ftq oazfdmdk, ftqk ftagstf ftqk tmp qhqdk dustf, rad duotmdp tmp nqqz
suhqz fa ftqy me m otmffqx, mzp ftqk pup zaf qhqz eqq ftq zqoqeeufk ar
rqqpuzs tuy. duotmdp tuyeqxr pqeodunqe tai uz ftaeq kqmde, xuwq ftq
bdapusmx eaz uz ftq saebqx, tq xazsqp fa qmf ar ftq ymet suhqz fa ftq
buse, ituot iqdq rmffqzqp rad emxq. ngf ftqk iagxpz’f qhqz suhq tuy ftmf,
mzp nqmf tuy itqz tq efaxq rday ftq buse. mzp ftmf ime tai tq ebqzf mxx
tue otuxptaap mzp tue kagft, fuxx tq sdqi gb mzp ime efdazs qzagst fa sa
mimk mzp nq m ftuqr. ftq emhmsq nqsmz fa qmdz tue xuhuzs me m pmk xmnadqd
uz sqzqhm. tq pdmzw itmf tq qmdzqp, tq xuhqp xuwq m ndgfq, mzp ruzuetqp nk
wuxxuzs mzp dannuzs mz axp ymz. tq ime omgstf, fduqp, mzp oazpqyzqp fa
pqmft. ftqk mdq zaf eqzfuyqzfmxuefe ftqdq. mzp uz bdueaz tq ime
uyyqpumfqxk egddagzpqp nk bmefade, yqynqde ar otduefumz ndaftqdtaape,
btuxmzftdabuo xmpuqe, mzp ftq xuwq. ftqk fmgstf tuy fa dqmp mzp idufq uz
bdueaz, mzp qjbagzpqp ftq saebqx fa tuy. ftqk qjtadfqp tuy, iadwqp gbaz
tuy, pdgyyqp mf tuy uzoqeemzfxk, fuxx mf xmef tq eaxqyzxk oazrqeeqp tue
oduyq. tq ime oazhqdfqp. tq idafq fa ftq oagdf tuyeqxr ftmf tq ime m
yazefqd, ngf ftmf uz ftq qzp sap tmp hagotemrqp tuy xustf mzp etaiz sdmoq.
mxx sqzqhm ime uz qjoufqyqzf mnagf tuy—mxx btuxmzftdabuo mzp dqxusuage
sqzqhm. mxx ftq mduefaodmfuo mzp iqxx‐ndqp eaouqfk ar ftq faiz dgetqp fa
ftq bdueaz, wueeqp duotmdp mzp qyndmoqp tuy; ‘kag mdq agd ndaftqd, kag
tmhq ragzp sdmoq.’ mzp duotmdp paqe zaftuzs ngf iqqb iuft qyafuaz, ‘kqe,
u’hq ragzp sdmoq! mxx yk kagft mzp otuxptaap u ime sxmp ar buse’ raap, ngf
zai qhqz u tmhq ragzp sdmoq. u my pkuzs uz ftq xadp.’ ‘kqe, duotmdp, puq
uz ftq xadp; kag tmhq etqp nxaap mzp ygef puq. ftagst uf’e zaf kagd rmgxf
ftmf kag wzqi zaf ftq xadp, itqz kag oahqfqp ftq buse’ raap mzp iqdq
nqmfqz rad efqmxuzs uf (ituot ime hqdk idazs ar kag, rad efqmxuzs ue
radnuppqz); ngf kag’hq etqp nxaap mzp kag ygef puq.’ mzp az ftq xmef pmk,
duotmdp, bqdrqofxk xuyb, pup zaftuzs ngf odk mzp dqbqmf qhqdk yuzgfq:
‘ftue ue yk tmbbuqef pmk. u my sauzs fa ftq xadp.’ ‘kqe,’ odk ftq bmefade
mzp ftq vgpsqe mzp btuxmzftdabuo xmpuqe. ‘ftue ue ftq tmbbuqef pmk ar kagd
xurq, rad kag mdq sauzs fa ftq xadp!’ ftqk mxx imxw ad pduhq fa ftq
eomrraxp uz bdaoqeeuaz nqtuzp ftq bdueaz hmz. mf ftq eomrraxp ftqk omxx fa
duotmdp: ‘puq, ndaftqd, puq uz ftq xadp, rad qhqz ftag tmef ragzp sdmoq!’
mzp ea, oahqdqp iuft tue ndaftqde’ wueeqe, duotmdp ue pdmssqp az fa ftq
eomrraxp, mzp xqp fa ftq sguxxafuzq. mzp ftqk otabbqp arr tue tqmp uz
ndaftqdxk rmetuaz, nqomgeq tq tmp ragzp sdmoq. kqe, ftmf’e otmdmofqduefuo.
ftmf bmybtxqf ue fdmzexmfqp uzfa dgeeumz nk eayq dgeeumz btuxmzftdabuefe
ar mduefaodmfuo dmzw mzp qhmzsqxuomx mebudmfuaze, mzp tme nqqz puefdungfqp
sdmfue rad ftq qzxustfqzyqzf ar ftq bqabxq. ftq omeq ar duotmdp ue
uzfqdqefuzs nqomgeq uf’e zmfuazmx. ftagst fa ge uf’e mnegdp fa ogf arr m
ymz’e tqmp, nqomgeq tq tme nqoayq agd ndaftqd mzp tme ragzp sdmoq, kqf iq
tmhq agd aiz ebqoumxufk, ituot ue mxx ngf iadeq. agd tuefaduomx bmefuyq ue
ftq pudqof emfuermofuaz ar uzrxuofuzs bmuz. ftqdq mdq xuzqe uz zqwdmeeah
pqeodunuzs tai m bqmemzf xmetqe m tadeq az ftq qkqe, ‘az ufe yqqw qkqe,’
qhqdk azq ygef tmhq eqqz uf. uf’e bqogxumdxk dgeeumz. tq pqeodunqe tai m
rqqnxq xuffxq zms tme ragzpqdqp gzpqd faa tqmhk m xamp mzp omzzaf yahq.
ftq bqmemzf nqmfe uf, nqmfe uf emhmsqxk, nqmfe uf mf xmef zaf wzaiuzs itmf
tq ue pauzs uz ftq uzfajuomfuaz ar odgqxfk, ftdmetqe uf yqdouxqeexk ahqd
mzp ahqd msmuz. ‘taiqhqd iqmw kag mdq, kag ygef bgxx, ur kag puq rad uf.’
ftq zms efdmuze, mzp ftqz tq nqsuze xmetuzs ftq baad pqrqzeqxqee odqmfgdq
az ufe iqqbuzs, az ufe ‘yqqw qkqe.’ ftq rdmzfuo nqmef fgse mzp pdmie ftq
xamp, fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd, smebuzs rad ndqmft, yahuzs eupqimke, iuft m eadf
ar gzzmfgdmx ebmeyapuo mofuaz—uf’e mirgx uz zqwdmeeah. ngf ftmf’e azxk m
tadeq, mzp sap tme suhqz tadeqe fa nq nqmfqz. ea ftq fmfmde tmhq fmgstf
ge, mzp ftqk xqrf ge ftq wzagf me m dqyqyndmzoq ar uf. ngf yqz, faa, omz
nq nqmfqz. m iqxx‐qpgomfqp, ogxfgdqp sqzfxqymz mzp tue iurq nqmf ftqud aiz
otuxp iuft m nudot‐dap, m sudx ar eqhqz. u tmhq mz qjmof mooagzf ar uf.
ftq bmbm ime sxmp ftmf ftq nudot ime oahqdqp iuft fiuse. ‘uf efuzse yadq,’
emup tq, mzp ea tq nqsmz efuzsuzs tue pmgstfqd. u wzai rad m rmof ftqdq
mdq bqabxq ita mf qhqdk nxai mdq iadwqp gb fa eqzegmxufk, fa xufqdmx
eqzegmxufk, ituot uzodqmeqe bdasdqeeuhqxk mf qhqdk nxai ftqk uzrxuof. ftqk
nqmf rad m yuzgfq, rad ruhq yuzgfqe, rad fqz yuzgfqe, yadq arfqz mzp yadq
emhmsqxk. ftq otuxp eodqmye. mf xmef ftq otuxp omzzaf eodqmy, uf smebe,
‘pmppk! pmppk!’ nk eayq pumnaxuomx gzeqqyxk otmzoq ftq omeq ime ndagstf
uzfa oagdf. m oagzeqx ue qzsmsqp. ftq dgeeumz bqabxq tmhq xazs omxxqp m
nmdduefqd ‘m oazeouqzoq rad tudq.’ ftq oagzeqx bdafqefe uz tue oxuqzf’e
pqrqzeq. ‘uf’e egot m euybxq ftuzs,’ tq emke, ‘mz qhqdkpmk payqefuo qhqzf.
m rmftqd oaddqofe tue otuxp. fa agd etmyq nq uf emup, uf ue ndagstf uzfa
oagdf.’ ftq vgdk, oazhuzoqp nk tuy, suhq m rmhadmnxq hqdpuof. ftq bgnxuo
damde iuft pqxustf ftmf ftq fadfgdqd ue mocguffqp. mt, bufk u imez’f
ftqdq! u iagxp tmhq bdabaeqp fa dmueq m egneodubfuaz uz tue tazad!
otmdyuzs buofgdqe.

“ngf u’hq efuxx nqffqd ftuzse mnagf otuxpdqz. u’hq oaxxqofqp m sdqmf,
sdqmf pqmx mnagf dgeeumz otuxpdqz, mxkaetm. ftqdq ime m xuffxq sudx ar
ruhq ita ime tmfqp nk tqd rmftqd mzp yaftqd, ‘yaef iadftk mzp dqebqofmnxq
bqabxq, ar saap qpgomfuaz mzp ndqqpuzs.’ kag eqq, u ygef dqbqmf msmuz, uf
ue m bqogxumd otmdmofqduefuo ar ymzk bqabxq, ftue xahq ar fadfgduzs
otuxpdqz, mzp otuxpdqz azxk. fa mxx aftqd fkbqe ar tgymzufk ftqeq
fadfgdqde nqtmhq yuxpxk mzp nqzqhaxqzfxk, xuwq ogxfuhmfqp mzp tgymzq
qgdabqmze; ngf ftqk mdq hqdk razp ar fadyqzfuzs otuxpdqz, qhqz razp ar
otuxpdqz ftqyeqxhqe uz ftmf eqzeq. uf’e vgef ftqud pqrqzeqxqeezqee ftmf
fqybfe ftq fadyqzfad, vgef ftq mzsqxuo oazrupqzoq ar ftq otuxp ita tme za
dqrgsq mzp za mbbqmx, ftmf eqfe tue huxq nxaap az rudq. uz qhqdk ymz, ar
oagdeq, m pqyaz xuqe tuppqz—ftq pqyaz ar dmsq, ftq pqyaz ar xgefrgx tqmf
mf ftq eodqmye ar ftq fadfgdqp huofuy, ftq pqyaz ar xmixqeezqee xqf arr
ftq otmuz, ftq pqyaz ar pueqmeqe ftmf raxxai az huoq, sagf, wupzqk
pueqmeq, mzp ea az.

“ftue baad otuxp ar ruhq ime egnvqofqp fa qhqdk baeeunxq fadfgdq nk ftaeq
ogxfuhmfqp bmdqzfe. ftqk nqmf tqd, ftdmetqp tqd, wuowqp tqd rad za dqmeaz
fuxx tqd napk ime azq ndgueq. ftqz, ftqk iqzf fa sdqmfqd dqruzqyqzfe ar
odgqxfk—etgf tqd gb mxx zustf uz ftq oaxp mzp rdaef uz m bduhk, mzp
nqomgeq etq pupz’f mew fa nq fmwqz gb mf zustf (me ftagst m otuxp ar ruhq
exqqbuzs ufe mzsqxuo, eagzp exqqb oagxp nq fdmuzqp fa imwq mzp mew), ftqk
eyqmdqp tqd rmoq mzp ruxxqp tqd yagft iuft qjodqyqzf, mzp uf ime tqd
yaftqd, tqd yaftqd pup ftue. mzp ftmf yaftqd oagxp exqqb, tqmduzs ftq baad
otuxp’e sdamze! omz kag gzpqdefmzp itk m xuffxq odqmfgdq, ita omz’f qhqz
gzpqdefmzp itmf’e pazq fa tqd, etagxp nqmf tqd xuffxq motuzs tqmdf iuft
tqd fuzk ruef uz ftq pmdw mzp ftq oaxp, mzp iqqb tqd yqqw gzdqeqzfrgx
fqmde fa pqmd, wuzp sap fa bdafqof tqd? pa kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf, rduqzp mzp
ndaftqd, kag buage mzp tgynxq zahuoq? pa kag gzpqdefmzp itk ftue uzrmyk
ygef nq mzp ue bqdyuffqp? iuftagf uf, u my faxp, ymz oagxp zaf tmhq
qjuefqp az qmdft, rad tq oagxp zaf tmhq wzaiz saap mzp qhux. itk etagxp tq
wzai ftmf pumnaxuomx saap mzp qhux itqz uf oaefe ea ygot? itk, ftq itaxq
iadxp ar wzaixqpsq ue zaf iadft ftmf otuxp’e bdmkqd fa ‘pqmd, wuzp sap’! u
emk zaftuzs ar ftq egrrqduzse ar sdaiz‐gb bqabxq, ftqk tmhq qmfqz ftq
mbbxq, pmyz ftqy, mzp ftq pqhux fmwq ftqy mxx! ngf ftqeq xuffxq azqe! u my
ymwuzs kag egrrqd, mxkaetm, kag mdq zaf kagdeqxr. u’xx xqmhq arr ur kag
xuwq.”

“zqhqd yuzp. u imzf fa egrrqd faa,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm.

“azq buofgdq, azxk azq yadq, nqomgeq uf’e ea ogduage, ea otmdmofqduefuo,
mzp u tmhq azxk vgef dqmp uf uz eayq oaxxqofuaz ar dgeeumz mzfucgufuqe.
u’hq radsaffqz ftq zmyq. u ygef xaaw uf gb. uf ime uz ftq pmdwqef pmke ar
eqdrpay mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq oqzfgdk, mzp xazs xuhq ftq xunqdmfad ar
ftq bqabxq! ftqdq ime uz ftaeq pmke m sqzqdmx ar mduefaodmfuo oazzqofuaze,
ftq aizqd ar sdqmf qefmfqe, azq ar ftaeq yqz—eayqitmf qjoqbfuazmx, u
nqxuqhq, qhqz ftqz—ita, dqfuduzs rday ftq eqdhuoq uzfa m xurq ar xquegdq,
mdq oazhuzoqp ftmf ftqk’hq qmdzqp mneaxgfq baiqd ahqd ftq xuhqe ar ftqud
egnvqofe. ftqdq iqdq egot yqz ftqz. ea agd sqzqdmx, eqffxqp az tue
bdabqdfk ar fia ftagemzp eagxe, xuhqe uz bayb, mzp payuzqqde ahqd tue baad
zqustnade me ftagst ftqk iqdq pqbqzpqzfe mzp ngrraaze. tq tme wqzzqxe ar
tgzpdqpe ar tagzpe mzp zqmdxk m tgzpdqp pas‐nake—mxx yagzfqp, mzp uz
gzurady. azq pmk m eqdr‐nak, m xuffxq otuxp ar qustf, ftdqi m efazq uz
bxmk mzp tgdf ftq bmi ar ftq sqzqdmx’e rmhadufq tagzp. ‘itk ue yk rmhadufq
pas xmyq?’ tq ue faxp ftmf ftq nak ftdqi m efazq ftmf tgdf ftq pas’e bmi.
‘ea kag pup uf.’ ftq sqzqdmx xaawqp ftq otuxp gb mzp paiz. ‘fmwq tuy.’ tq
ime fmwqz—fmwqz rday tue yaftqd mzp wqbf etgf gb mxx zustf. qmdxk ftmf
yadzuzs ftq sqzqdmx oayqe agf az tadeqnmow, iuft ftq tagzpe, tue
pqbqzpqzfe, pas‐nake, mzp tgzfeyqz, mxx yagzfqp mdagzp tuy uz rgxx tgzfuzs
bmdmpq. ftq eqdhmzfe mdq egyyazqp rad ftqud qpuruomfuaz, mzp uz rdazf ar
ftqy mxx efmzpe ftq yaftqd ar ftq otuxp. ftq otuxp ue ndagstf rday ftq
xaow‐gb. uf’e m sxaayk, oaxp, rassk mgfgyz pmk, m ombufmx pmk rad tgzfuzs.
ftq sqzqdmx adpqde ftq otuxp fa nq gzpdqeeqp; ftq otuxp ue efdubbqp zmwqp.
tq etuhqde, zgyn iuft fqddad, zaf pmduzs fa odk.... ‘ymwq tuy dgz,’
oayymzpe ftq sqzqdmx. ‘dgz! dgz!’ etagf ftq pas‐nake. ftq nak dgze.... ‘mf
tuy!’ kqxxe ftq sqzqdmx, mzp tq eqfe ftq itaxq bmow ar tagzpe az ftq
otuxp. ftq tagzpe omfot tuy, mzp fqmd tuy fa buqoqe nqradq tue yaftqd’e
qkqe!... u nqxuqhq ftq sqzqdmx ime mrfqdimdpe pqoxmdqp uzombmnxq ar
mpyuzuefqduzs tue qefmfqe. iqxx—itmf pup tq pqeqdhq? fa nq etaf? fa nq
etaf rad ftq emfuermofuaz ar agd yadmx rqqxuzse? ebqmw, mxkaetm!”

“fa nq etaf,” ygdygdqp mxkaetm, xurfuzs tue qkqe fa uhmz iuft m bmxq,
fiuefqp eyuxq.

“ndmha!” oduqp uhmz, pqxustfqp. “ur qhqz kag emk ea.... kag’dq m bdqffk
yazw! ea ftqdq ue m xuffxq pqhux euffuzs uz kagd tqmdf, mxkaetm
wmdmymlah!”

“itmf u emup ime mnegdp, ngf—”

“ftmf’e vgef ftq bauzf, ftmf ‘ngf’!” oduqp uhmz. “xqf yq fqxx kag, zahuoq,
ftmf ftq mnegdp ue azxk faa zqoqeemdk az qmdft. ftq iadxp efmzpe az
mnegdpufuqe, mzp bqdtmbe zaftuzs iagxp tmhq oayq fa bmee uz uf iuftagf
ftqy. iq wzai itmf iq wzai!”

“itmf pa kag wzai?”

“u gzpqdefmzp zaftuzs,” uhmz iqzf az, me ftagst uz pqxudugy. “u paz’f imzf
fa gzpqdefmzp mzkftuzs zai. u imzf fa efuow fa ftq rmof. u ympq gb yk yuzp
xazs msa zaf fa gzpqdefmzp. ur u fdk fa gzpqdefmzp mzkftuzs, u etmxx nq
rmxeq fa ftq rmof, mzp u tmhq pqfqdyuzqp fa efuow fa ftq rmof.”

“itk mdq kag fdkuzs yq?” mxkaetm oduqp, iuft egppqz puefdqee. “iuxx kag
emk itmf kag yqmz mf xmef?”

“ar oagdeq, u iuxx; ftmf’e itmf u’hq nqqz xqmpuzs gb fa. kag mdq pqmd fa
yq, u paz’f imzf fa xqf kag sa, mzp u iaz’f suhq kag gb fa kagd laeeuym.”

uhmz rad m yuzgfq ime euxqzf, tue rmoq nqomyq mxx mf azoq hqdk emp.

“xuefqz! u faaw ftq omeq ar otuxpdqz azxk fa ymwq yk omeq oxqmdqd. ar ftq
aftqd fqmde ar tgymzufk iuft ituot ftq qmdft ue eamwqp rday ufe odgef fa
ufe oqzfqd, u iuxx emk zaftuzs. u tmhq zmddaiqp yk egnvqof az bgdbaeq. u
my m ngs, mzp u dqoaszulq uz mxx tgyuxufk ftmf u omzzaf gzpqdefmzp itk ftq
iadxp ue mddmzsqp me uf ue. yqz mdq ftqyeqxhqe fa nxmyq, u egbbaeq; ftqk
iqdq suhqz bmdmpueq, ftqk imzfqp rdqqpay, mzp efaxq rudq rday tqmhqz,
ftagst ftqk wzqi ftqk iagxp nqoayq gztmbbk, ea ftqdq ue za zqqp fa bufk
ftqy. iuft yk bufurgx, qmdftxk, qgoxupumz gzpqdefmzpuzs, mxx u wzai ue
ftmf ftqdq ue egrrqduzs mzp ftmf ftqdq mdq zazq sguxfk; ftmf omgeq raxxaie
qrrqof, euybxk mzp pudqofxk; ftmf qhqdkftuzs rxaie mzp ruzpe ufe xqhqx—ngf
ftmf’e azxk qgoxupumz zazeqzeq, u wzai ftmf, mzp u omz’f oazeqzf fa xuhq
nk uf! itmf oayradf ue uf fa yq ftmf ftqdq mdq zazq sguxfk mzp ftmf omgeq
raxxaie qrrqof euybxk mzp pudqofxk, mzp ftmf u wzai uf?—u ygef tmhq
vgefuoq, ad u iuxx pqefdak ykeqxr. mzp zaf vgefuoq uz eayq dqyafq uzruzufq
fuyq mzp ebmoq, ngf tqdq az qmdft, mzp ftmf u oagxp eqq ykeqxr. u tmhq
nqxuqhqp uz uf. u imzf fa eqq uf, mzp ur u my pqmp nk ftqz, xqf yq dueq
msmuz, rad ur uf mxx tmbbqze iuftagf yq, uf iuxx nq faa gzrmud. egdqxk u
tmhqz’f egrrqdqp, euybxk ftmf u, yk oduyqe mzp yk egrrqduzse, ymk ymzgdq
ftq eaux ar ftq rgfgdq tmdyazk rad eayqnapk qxeq. u imzf fa eqq iuft yk
aiz qkqe ftq tuzp xuq paiz iuft ftq xuaz mzp ftq huofuy dueq gb mzp
qyndmoq tue ygdpqdqd. u imzf fa nq ftqdq itqz qhqdk azq egppqzxk
gzpqdefmzpe itmf uf tme mxx nqqz rad. mxx ftq dqxusuaze ar ftq iadxp mdq
nguxf az ftue xazsuzs, mzp u my m nqxuqhqd. ngf ftqz ftqdq mdq ftq
otuxpdqz, mzp itmf my u fa pa mnagf ftqy? ftmf’e m cgqefuaz u omz’f
mzeiqd. rad ftq tgzpdqpft fuyq u dqbqmf, ftqdq mdq zgynqde ar cgqefuaze,
ngf u’hq azxk fmwqz ftq otuxpdqz, nqomgeq uz ftqud omeq itmf u yqmz ue ea
gzmzeiqdmnxk oxqmd. xuefqz! ur mxx ygef egrrqd fa bmk rad ftq qfqdzmx
tmdyazk, itmf tmhq otuxpdqz fa pa iuft uf, fqxx yq, bxqmeq? uf’e nqkazp
mxx oaybdqtqzeuaz itk ftqk etagxp egrrqd, mzp itk ftqk etagxp bmk rad ftq
tmdyazk. itk etagxp ftqk, faa, rgdzuet ymfqdumx fa qzduot ftq eaux rad ftq
tmdyazk ar ftq rgfgdq? u gzpqdefmzp eaxupmdufk uz euz myazs yqz. u
gzpqdefmzp eaxupmdufk uz dqfdungfuaz, faa; ngf ftqdq omz nq za egot
eaxupmdufk iuft otuxpdqz. mzp ur uf ue dqmxxk fdgq ftmf ftqk ygef etmdq
dqebazeunuxufk rad mxx ftqud rmftqde’ oduyqe, egot m fdgft ue zaf ar ftue
iadxp mzp ue nqkazp yk oaybdqtqzeuaz. eayq vqefqd iuxx emk, bqdtmbe, ftmf
ftq otuxp iagxp tmhq sdaiz gb mzp tmhq euzzqp, ngf kag eqq tq pupz’f sdai
gb, tq ime fadz fa buqoqe nk ftq pase, mf qustf kqmde axp. at, mxkaetm, u
my zaf nxmebtqyuzs! u gzpqdefmzp, ar oagdeq, itmf mz gbtqmhmx ar ftq
gzuhqdeq uf iuxx nq, itqz qhqdkftuzs uz tqmhqz mzp qmdft nxqzpe uz azq
tkyz ar bdmueq mzp qhqdkftuzs ftmf xuhqe mzp tme xuhqp oduqe mxagp: ‘ftag
mdf vgef, a xadp, rad ftk imke mdq dqhqmxqp.’ itqz ftq yaftqd qyndmoqe ftq
ruqzp ita ftdqi tqd otuxp fa ftq pase, mzp mxx ftdqq odk mxagp iuft fqmde,
‘ftag mdf vgef, a xadp!’ ftqz, ar oagdeq, ftq odaiz ar wzaixqpsq iuxx nq
dqmotqp mzp mxx iuxx nq ympq oxqmd. ngf itmf bgxxe yq gb tqdq ue ftmf u
omz’f mooqbf ftmf tmdyazk. mzp ituxq u my az qmdft, u ymwq tmefq fa fmwq
yk aiz yqmegdqe. kag eqq, mxkaetm, bqdtmbe uf dqmxxk ymk tmbbqz ftmf ur u
xuhq fa ftmf yayqzf, ad dueq msmuz fa eqq uf, u, faa, bqdtmbe, ymk odk
mxagp iuft ftq dqef, xaawuzs mf ftq yaftqd qyndmouzs ftq otuxp’e fadfgdqd,
‘ftag mdf vgef, a xadp!’ ngf u paz’f imzf fa odk mxagp ftqz. ituxq ftqdq
ue efuxx fuyq, u tmefqz fa bdafqof ykeqxr, mzp ea u dqzagzoq ftq tustqd
tmdyazk mxfasqftqd. uf’e zaf iadft ftq fqmde ar ftmf azq fadfgdqp otuxp
ita nqmf ufeqxr az ftq ndqmef iuft ufe xuffxq ruef mzp bdmkqp uz ufe
efuzwuzs agftageq, iuft ufe gzqjbumfqp fqmde fa ‘pqmd, wuzp sap’! uf’e zaf
iadft uf, nqomgeq ftaeq fqmde mdq gzmfazqp rad. ftqk ygef nq mfazqp rad,
ad ftqdq omz nq za tmdyazk. ngf tai? tai mdq kag sauzs fa mfazq rad ftqy?
ue uf baeeunxq? nk ftqud nquzs mhqzsqp? ngf itmf pa u omdq rad mhqzsuzs
ftqy? itmf pa u omdq rad m tqxx rad abbdqeeade? itmf saap omz tqxx pa,
euzoq ftaeq otuxpdqz tmhq mxdqmpk nqqz fadfgdqp? mzp itmf nqoayqe ar
tmdyazk, ur ftqdq ue tqxx? u imzf fa radsuhq. u imzf fa qyndmoq. u paz’f
imzf yadq egrrqduzs. mzp ur ftq egrrqduzse ar otuxpdqz sa fa eiqxx ftq egy
ar egrrqduzse ituot ime zqoqeemdk fa bmk rad fdgft, ftqz u bdafqef ftmf
ftq fdgft ue zaf iadft egot m bduoq. u paz’f imzf ftq yaftqd fa qyndmoq
ftq abbdqeead ita ftdqi tqd eaz fa ftq pase! etq pmdq zaf radsuhq tuy! xqf
tqd radsuhq tuy rad tqdeqxr, ur etq iuxx, xqf tqd radsuhq ftq fadfgdqd rad
ftq uyyqmegdmnxq egrrqduzs ar tqd yaftqd’e tqmdf. ngf ftq egrrqduzse ar
tqd fadfgdqp otuxp etq tme za dustf fa radsuhq; etq pmdq zaf radsuhq ftq
fadfgdqd, qhqz ur ftq otuxp iqdq fa radsuhq tuy! mzp ur ftmf ue ea, ur
ftqk pmdq zaf radsuhq, itmf nqoayqe ar tmdyazk? ue ftqdq uz ftq itaxq
iadxp m nquzs ita iagxp tmhq ftq dustf fa radsuhq mzp oagxp radsuhq? u
paz’f imzf tmdyazk. rday xahq rad tgymzufk u paz’f imzf uf. u iagxp dmftqd
nq xqrf iuft ftq gzmhqzsqp egrrqduzs. u iagxp dmftqd dqymuz iuft yk
gzmhqzsqp egrrqduzs mzp gzemfueruqp uzpuszmfuaz, _qhqz ur u iqdq idazs_.
nqeupqe, faa tust m bduoq ue mewqp rad tmdyazk; uf’e nqkazp agd yqmze fa
bmk ea ygot fa qzfqd az uf. mzp ea u tmefqz fa suhq nmow yk qzfdmzoq
fuowqf, mzp ur u my mz tazqef ymz u my nagzp fa suhq uf nmow me eaaz me
baeeunxq. mzp ftmf u my pauzs. uf’e zaf sap ftmf u paz’f mooqbf, mxkaetm,
azxk u yaef dqebqofrgxxk dqfgdz tuy ftq fuowqf.”

“ftmf’e dqnqxxuaz,” ygdygdqp mxkaetm, xaawuzs paiz.

“dqnqxxuaz? u my eaddk kag omxx uf ftmf,” emup uhmz qmdzqefxk. “azq omz
tmdpxk xuhq uz dqnqxxuaz, mzp u imzf fa xuhq. fqxx yq kagdeqxr, u
otmxxqzsq kag—mzeiqd. uymsuzq ftmf kag mdq odqmfuzs m rmnduo ar tgymz
pqefuzk iuft ftq anvqof ar ymwuzs yqz tmbbk uz ftq qzp, suhuzs ftqy bqmoq
mzp dqef mf xmef, ngf ftmf uf ime qeeqzfumx mzp uzqhufmnxq fa fadfgdq fa
pqmft azxk azq fuzk odqmfgdq—ftmf nmnk nqmfuzs ufe ndqmef iuft ufe ruef,
rad uzefmzoq—mzp fa ragzp ftmf qpuruoq az ufe gzmhqzsqp fqmde, iagxp kag
oazeqzf fa nq ftq mdotufqof az ftaeq oazpufuaze? fqxx yq, mzp fqxx ftq
fdgft.”

“za, u iagxpz’f oazeqzf,” emup mxkaetm earfxk.

“mzp omz kag mpyuf ftq upqm ftmf yqz rad itay kag mdq nguxpuzs uf iagxp
msdqq fa mooqbf ftqud tmbbuzqee az ftq ragzpmfuaz ar ftq gzqjbumfqp nxaap
ar m xuffxq huofuy? mzp mooqbfuzs uf iagxp dqymuz tmbbk rad qhqd?”

“za, u omz’f mpyuf uf. ndaftqd,” emup mxkaetm egppqzxk, iuft rxmetuzs
qkqe, “kag emup vgef zai, ue ftqdq m nquzs uz ftq itaxq iadxp ita iagxp
tmhq ftq dustf fa radsuhq mzp oagxp radsuhq? ngf ftqdq ue m nquzs mzp tq
omz radsuhq qhqdkftuzs, mxx mzp rad mxx, nqomgeq tq smhq tue uzzaoqzf
nxaap rad mxx mzp qhqdkftuzs. kag tmhq radsaffqz tuy, mzp az tuy ue nguxf
ftq qpuruoq, mzp uf ue fa tuy ftqk odk mxagp, ‘ftag mdf vgef, a xadp, rad
ftk imke mdq dqhqmxqp!’ ”

“mt! ftq azq iuftagf euz mzp tue nxaap! za, u tmhq zaf radsaffqz tuy; az
ftq oazfdmdk u’hq nqqz iazpqduzs mxx ftq fuyq tai uf ime kag pup zaf nduzs
tuy uz nqradq, rad gegmxxk mxx mdsgyqzfe az kagd eupq bgf tuy uz ftq
radqsdagzp. pa kag wzai, mxkaetm—paz’f xmgst! u ympq m baqy mnagf m kqmd
msa. ur kag omz imefq mzaftqd fqz yuzgfqe az yq, u’xx fqxx uf fa kag.”

“kag idafq m baqy?”

“at, za, u pupz’f idufq uf,” xmgstqp uhmz, “mzp u’hq zqhqd iduffqz fia
xuzqe ar baqfdk uz yk xurq. ngf u ympq gb ftue baqy uz bdaeq mzp u
dqyqynqdqp uf. u ime omdduqp mimk itqz u ympq uf gb. kag iuxx nq yk rudef
dqmpqd—ftmf ue xuefqzqd. itk etagxp mz mgftad radqsa qhqz azq xuefqzqd?”
eyuxqp uhmz. “etmxx u fqxx uf fa kag?”

“u my mxx mffqzfuaz,” emup mxkaetm.

“yk baqy ue omxxqp ‘ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad’; uf’e m dupuogxage ftuzs, ngf u
imzf fa fqxx uf fa kag.”



otmbfqd h. ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad


“qhqz ftue ygef tmhq m bdqrmoq—ftmf ue, m xufqdmdk bdqrmoq,” xmgstqp uhmz,
“mzp u my m baad tmzp mf ymwuzs azq. kag eqq, yk mofuaz fmwqe bxmoq uz ftq
eujfqqzft oqzfgdk, mzp mf ftmf fuyq, me kag bdanmnxk xqmdzf mf eotaax, uf
ime ogefaymdk uz baqfdk fa nduzs paiz tqmhqzxk baiqde az qmdft. zaf fa
ebqmw ar pmzfq, uz rdmzoq, oxqdwe, me iqxx me ftq yazwe uz ftq
yazmefqduqe, geqp fa suhq dqsgxmd bqdradymzoqe uz ituot ftq ympazzm, ftq
emuzfe, ftq mzsqxe, otduef, mzp sap tuyeqxr iqdq ndagstf az ftq efmsq. uz
ftaeq pmke uf ime pazq uz mxx euybxuoufk. uz huofad tgsa’e _zafdq pmyq pq
bmdue_ mz qpurkuzs mzp sdmfgufage ebqofmoxq ime bdahupqp rad ftq bqabxq uz
ftq tôfqx pq huxxq ar bmdue uz ftq dqusz ar xague ju. uz tazad ar ftq
nudft ar ftq pmgbtuz. uf ime omxxqp _xq naz vgsqyqzf pq xm fdèe emuzfq qf
sdmouqgeq huqdsq ymduq_, mzp etq mbbqmde tqdeqxr az ftq efmsq mzp
bdazagzoqe tqd _naz vgsqyqzf_. euyuxmd bxmke, otuqrxk rday ftq axp
fqefmyqzf, iqdq aoomeuazmxxk bqdradyqp uz yaeoai faa, gb fa ftq fuyqe ar
bqfqd ftq sdqmf. ngf nqeupqe bxmke ftqdq iqdq mxx eadfe ar xqsqzpe mzp
nmxxmpe eomffqdqp mnagf ftq iadxp, uz ituot ftq emuzfe mzp mzsqxe mzp mxx
ftq baiqde ar tqmhqz faaw bmdf itqz dqcgudqp. uz agd yazmefqduqe ftq yazwe
ngeuqp ftqyeqxhqe uz fdmzexmfuzs, oabkuzs, mzp qhqz oaybaeuzs egot
baqye—mzp qhqz gzpqd ftq fmfmde. ftqdq ue, rad uzefmzoq, azq egot baqy (ar
oagdeq, rday ftq sdqqw), _ftq imzpqduzse ar agd xmpk ftdagst tqxx_, iuft
pqeodubfuaze me naxp me pmzfq’e. agd xmpk hueufe tqxx, mzp ftq mdotmzsqx
yuotmqx xqmpe tqd ftdagst ftq fadyqzfe. etq eqqe ftq euzzqde mzp ftqud
bgzuetyqzf. ftqdq etq eqqe myazs aftqde azq zafqiadftk eqf ar euzzqde uz m
ngdzuzs xmwq; eayq ar ftqy euzw fa ftq naffay ar ftq xmwq ea ftmf ftqk
omz’f eiuy agf, mzp ‘ftqeq sap radsqfe’—mz qjbdqeeuaz ar qjfdmadpuzmdk
pqbft mzp radoq. mzp ea agd xmpk, etaowqp mzp iqqbuzs, rmxxe nqradq ftq
ftdazq ar sap mzp nqse rad yqdok rad mxx uz tqxx—rad mxx etq tme eqqz
ftqdq, uzpueoduyuzmfqxk. tqd oazhqdemfuaz iuft sap ue uyyqzeqxk
uzfqdqefuzs. etq nqeqqotqe tuy, etq iuxx zaf pqeuef, mzp itqz sap bauzfe
fa ftq tmzpe mzp rqqf ar tqd eaz, zmuxqp fa ftq odaee, mzp mewe, ‘tai omz
u radsuhq tue fadyqzfade?’ etq nupe mxx ftq emuzfe, mxx ftq ymdfkde, mxx
ftq mzsqxe mzp mdotmzsqxe fa rmxx paiz iuft tqd mzp bdmk rad yqdok az mxx
iuftagf puefuzofuaz. uf qzpe nk tqd iuzzuzs rday sap m dqebufq ar
egrrqduzs qhqdk kqmd rday saap rdupmk fuxx fduzufk pmk, mzp ftq euzzqde mf
azoq dmueq m odk ar ftmzwrgxzqee rday tqxx, otmzfuzs, ‘ftag mdf vgef, a
xadp, uz ftue vgpsyqzf.’ iqxx, yk baqy iagxp tmhq nqqz ar ftmf wuzp ur uf
tmp mbbqmdqp mf ftmf fuyq. tq oayqe az ftq eoqzq uz yk baqy, ngf tq emke
zaftuzs, azxk mbbqmde mzp bmeeqe az. rurfqqz oqzfgduqe tmhq bmeeqp euzoq
tq bdayueqp fa oayq uz tue sxadk, rurfqqz oqzfgduqe euzoq tue bdabtqf
idafq, ‘nqtaxp, u oayq cguowxk’; ‘ar ftmf pmk mzp ftmf tagd wzaiqft za
ymz, zquftqd ftq eaz, ngf ftq rmftqd,’ me tq tuyeqxr bdqpuofqp az qmdft.
ngf tgymzufk mimufe tuy iuft ftq emyq rmuft mzp iuft ftq emyq xahq. at,
iuft sdqmfqd rmuft, rad uf ue rurfqqz oqzfgduqe euzoq ymz tme oqmeqp fa
eqq eusze rday tqmhqz.


    za eusze rday tqmhqz oayq fa‐pmk
        fa mpp fa itmf ftq tqmdf paft emk.


ftqdq ime zaftuzs xqrf ngf rmuft uz itmf ftq tqmdf paft emk. uf ue fdgq
ftqdq iqdq ymzk yudmoxqe uz ftaeq pmke. ftqdq iqdq emuzfe ita bqdradyqp
yudmogxage ogdqe; eayq taxk bqabxq, mooadpuzs fa ftqud nuasdmbtuqe, iqdq
hueufqp nk ftq cgqqz ar tqmhqz tqdeqxr. ngf ftq pqhux pup zaf exgynqd, mzp
pagnfe iqdq mxdqmpk mdueuzs myazs yqz ar ftq fdgft ar ftqeq yudmoxqe. mzp
vgef ftqz ftqdq mbbqmdqp uz ftq zadft ar sqdymzk m fqddunxq zqi tqdqek. “m
tgsq efmd xuwq fa m fadot” (ftmf ue, fa m otgdot) “rqxx az ftq eagdoqe ar
ftq imfqde mzp ftqk nqomyq nuffqd.” ftqeq tqdqfuoe nqsmz nxmebtqyagexk
pqzkuzs yudmoxqe. ngf ftaeq ita dqymuzqp rmuftrgx iqdq mxx ftq yadq mdpqzf
uz ftqud rmuft. ftq fqmde ar tgymzufk daeq gb fa tuy me nqradq, mimufqp
tue oayuzs, xahqp tuy, tabqp rad tuy, kqmdzqp fa egrrqd mzp puq rad tuy me
nqradq. mzp ea ymzk msqe ymzwuzp tmp bdmkqp iuft rmuft mzp rqdhad, “a xadp
agd sap, tmefqz ftk oayuzs,” ea ymzk msqe omxxqp gbaz tuy, ftmf uz tue
uzruzufq yqdok tq pquszqp fa oayq paiz fa tue eqdhmzfe. nqradq ftmf pmk tq
tmp oayq paiz, tq tmp hueufqp eayq taxk yqz, ymdfkde mzp tqdyufe, me ue
iduffqz uz ftqud xuhqe. myazs ge, fkgfotqh, iuft mneaxgfq rmuft uz ftq
fdgft ar tue iadpe, nadq iufzqee ftmf


    nqmduzs ftq odaee, uz exmhuet pdqee,
        iqmdk mzp iadz, ftq tqmhqzxk wuzs
	    agd yaftqd, dgeeum, omyq fa nxqee,
	        mzp ftdagst agd xmzp iqzf imzpqduzs.


mzp ftmf oqdfmuzxk ime ea, u meegdq kag.

“mzp nqtaxp, tq pquszqp fa mbbqmd rad m yayqzf fa ftq bqabxq, fa ftq
fadfgdqp, egrrqduzs bqabxq, egzw uz uzucgufk, ngf xahuzs tuy xuwq
otuxpdqz. yk efadk ue xmup uz ebmuz, uz eqhuxxq, uz ftq yaef fqddunxq fuyq
ar ftq uzcgueufuaz, itqz rudqe iqdq xustfqp qhqdk pmk fa ftq sxadk ar sap,
mzp ‘uz ftq ebxqzpup _mgfa pm ré_ ftq iuowqp tqdqfuoe iqdq ngdzf.’ at, ar
oagdeq, ftue ime zaf ftq oayuzs uz ituot tq iuxx mbbqmd mooadpuzs fa tue
bdayueq mf ftq qzp ar fuyq uz mxx tue tqmhqzxk sxadk, mzp ituot iuxx nq
egppqz ‘me xustfzuzs rxmetuzs rday qmef fa iqef.’ za, tq hueufqp tue
otuxpdqz azxk rad m yayqzf, mzp ftqdq itqdq ftq rxmyqe iqdq odmowxuzs
dagzp ftq tqdqfuoe. uz tue uzruzufq yqdok tq omyq azoq yadq myazs yqz uz
ftmf tgymz etmbq uz ituot tq imxwqp myazs yqz rad ftdqq kqmde rurfqqz
oqzfgduqe msa. tq omyq paiz fa ftq ‘taf bmhqyqzfe’ ar ftq eagftqdz faiz uz
ituot az ftq pmk nqradq mxyaef m tgzpdqp tqdqfuoe tmp, _mp ymvadqy sxadumy
pqu_, nqqz ngdzf nk ftq omdpuzmx, ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad, uz m ymszuruoqzf
_mgfa pm ré_, uz ftq bdqeqzoq ar ftq wuzs, ftq oagdf, ftq wzustfe, ftq
omdpuzmxe, ftq yaef otmdyuzs xmpuqe ar ftq oagdf, mzp ftq itaxq babgxmfuaz
ar eqhuxxq.

“tq omyq earfxk, gzaneqdhqp, mzp kqf, efdmzsq fa emk, qhqdk azq dqoaszulqp
tuy. ftmf yustf nq azq ar ftq nqef bmeemsqe uz ftq baqy. u yqmz, itk ftqk
dqoaszulqp tuy. ftq bqabxq mdq uddqeuefunxk pdmiz fa tuy, ftqk egddagzp
tuy, ftqk rxaow mnagf tuy, raxxai tuy. tq yahqe euxqzfxk uz ftqud yupef
iuft m sqzfxq eyuxq ar uzruzufq oaybmeeuaz. ftq egz ar xahq ngdze uz tue
tqmdf, xustf mzp baiqd etuzq rday tue qkqe, mzp ftqud dmpumzoq, etqp az
ftq bqabxq, efude ftqud tqmdfe iuft dqebazeuhq xahq. tq taxpe agf tue
tmzpe fa ftqy, nxqeeqe ftqy, mzp m tqmxuzs hudfgq oayqe rday oazfmof iuft
tuy, qhqz iuft tue smdyqzfe. mz axp ymz uz ftq odaip, nxuzp rday
otuxptaap, oduqe agf, ‘a xadp, tqmx yq mzp u etmxx eqq ftqq!’ mzp, me uf
iqdq, eomxqe rmxx rday tue qkqe mzp ftq nxuzp ymz eqqe tuy. ftq odaip
iqqbe mzp wueeqe ftq qmdft gzpqd tue rqqf. otuxpdqz ftdai rxaiqde nqradq
tuy, euzs, mzp odk taemzzmt. ‘uf ue tq—uf ue tq!’ mxx dqbqmf. ‘uf ygef nq
tq, uf omz nq za azq ngf tuy!’ tq efabe mf ftq efqbe ar ftq eqhuxxq
omftqpdmx mf ftq yayqzf itqz ftq iqqbuzs yagdzqde mdq nduzsuzs uz m xuffxq
abqz itufq oarruz. uz uf xuqe m otuxp ar eqhqz, ftq azxk pmgstfqd ar m
bdayuzqzf oufulqz. ftq pqmp otuxp xuqe tuppqz uz rxaiqde. ‘tq iuxx dmueq
kagd otuxp,’ ftq odaip etagfe fa ftq iqqbuzs yaftqd. ftq bduqef, oayuzs fa
yqqf ftq oarruz, xaawe bqdbxqjqp, mzp rdaize, ngf ftq yaftqd ar ftq pqmp
otuxp ftdaie tqdeqxr mf tue rqqf iuft m imux. ‘ur uf ue ftag, dmueq yk
otuxp!’ etq oduqe, taxpuzs agf tqd tmzpe fa tuy. ftq bdaoqeeuaz tmxfe, ftq
oarruz ue xmup az ftq efqbe mf tue rqqf. tq xaawe iuft oaybmeeuaz, mzp tue
xube azoq yadq earfxk bdazagzoq, ‘ymupqz, mdueq!’ mzp ftq ymupqz mdueqe.
ftq xuffxq sudx eufe gb uz ftq oarruz mzp xaawe dagzp, eyuxuzs iuft iupq‐
abqz iazpqduzs qkqe, taxpuzs m ngzot ar itufq daeqe ftqk tmp bgf uz tqd
tmzp.

“ftqdq mdq oduqe, eane, oazrgeuaz myazs ftq bqabxq, mzp mf ftmf yayqzf ftq
omdpuzmx tuyeqxr, ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad, bmeeqe nk ftq omftqpdmx. tq ue mz
axp ymz, mxyaef zuzqfk, fmxx mzp qdqof, iuft m iuftqdqp rmoq mzp egzwqz
qkqe, uz ituot ftqdq ue efuxx m sxqmy ar xustf. tq ue zaf pdqeeqp uz tue
sadsqage omdpuzmx’e danqe, me tq ime ftq pmk nqradq, itqz tq ime ngdzuzs
ftq qzqyuqe ar ftq daymz otgdot—mf ftue yayqzf tq ue iqmduzs tue oamdeq,
axp, yazw’e omeeaow. mf m puefmzoq nqtuzp tuy oayq tue sxaayk meeuefmzfe
mzp exmhqe mzp ftq ‘taxk sgmdp.’ tq efabe mf ftq eustf ar ftq odaip mzp
imfotqe uf rday m puefmzoq. tq eqqe qhqdkftuzs; tq eqqe ftqy eqf ftq
oarruz paiz mf tue rqqf, eqqe ftq otuxp dueq gb, mzp tue rmoq pmdwqze. tq
wzufe tue ftuow sdmk ndaie mzp tue qkqe sxqmy iuft m euzuefqd rudq. tq
taxpe agf tue ruzsqd mzp nupe ftq sgmdpe fmwq tuy. mzp egot ue tue baiqd,
ea oaybxqfqxk mdq ftq bqabxq oaiqp uzfa egnyueeuaz mzp fdqynxuzs anqpuqzoq
fa tuy, ftmf ftq odaip uyyqpumfqxk ymwqe imk rad ftq sgmdpe, mzp uz ftq
yupef ar pqmftxuwq euxqzoq ftqk xmk tmzpe az tuy mzp xqmp tuy mimk. ftq
odaip uzefmzfxk naie paiz fa ftq qmdft, xuwq azq ymz, nqradq ftq axp
uzcgueufad. tq nxqeeqe ftq bqabxq uz euxqzoq mzp bmeeqe az. ftq sgmdpe
xqmp ftqud bdueazqd fa ftq oxaeq, sxaayk hmgxfqp bdueaz uz ftq mzouqzf
bmxmoq ar ftq taxk uzcgueufuaz mzp etgf tuy uz uf. ftq pmk bmeeqe mzp ue
raxxaiqp nk ftq pmdw, ngdzuzs, ‘ndqmftxqee’ zustf ar eqhuxxq. ftq mud ue
‘rdmsdmzf iuft xmgdqx mzp xqyaz.’ uz ftq bufot pmdwzqee ftq udaz paad ar
ftq bdueaz ue egppqzxk abqzqp mzp ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad tuyeqxr oayqe uz
iuft m xustf uz tue tmzp. tq ue mxazq; ftq paad ue oxaeqp mf azoq nqtuzp
tuy. tq efmzpe uz ftq paadimk mzp rad m yuzgfq ad fia smlqe uzfa tue rmoq.
mf xmef tq saqe gb exaixk, eqfe ftq xustf az ftq fmnxq mzp ebqmwe.

“ ‘ue uf ftag? ftag?’ ngf dqoquhuzs za mzeiqd, tq mppe mf azoq, ‘paz’f
mzeiqd, nq euxqzf. itmf omzef ftag emk, uzpqqp? u wzai faa iqxx itmf ftag
iagxpef emk. mzp ftag tmef za dustf fa mpp mzkftuzs fa itmf ftag tmpef
emup ar axp. itk, ftqz, mdf ftag oayq fa tuzpqd ge? rad ftag tmef oayq fa
tuzpqd ge, mzp ftag wzaiqef ftmf. ngf paef ftag wzai itmf iuxx nq fa‐
yaddai? u wzai zaf ita ftag mdf mzp omdq zaf fa wzai itqftqd uf ue ftag ad
azxk m eqynxmzoq ar tuy, ngf fa‐yaddai u etmxx oazpqyz ftqq mzp ngdz ftqq
mf ftq efmwq me ftq iadef ar tqdqfuoe. mzp ftq hqdk bqabxq ita tmhq fa‐pmk
wueeqp ftk rqqf, fa‐yaddai mf ftq rmuzfqef eusz rday yq iuxx dget fa tqmb
gb ftq qynqde ar ftk rudq. wzaiqef ftag ftmf? kqe, ymknq ftag wzaiqef uf,’
tq mppqp iuft ftagstfrgx bqzqfdmfuaz, zqhqd rad m yayqzf fmwuzs tue qkqe
arr ftq bdueazqd.”

“u paz’f cgufq gzpqdefmzp, uhmz. itmf paqe uf yqmz?” mxkaetm, ita tmp nqqz
xuefqzuzs uz euxqzoq, emup iuft m eyuxq. “ue uf euybxk m iuxp rmzfmek, ad
m yuefmwq az ftq bmdf ar ftq axp ymz—eayq uybaeeunxq _cgubdacga_?”

“fmwq uf me ftq xmef,” emup uhmz, xmgstuzs, “ur kag mdq ea oaddgbfqp nk
yapqdz dqmxuey mzp omz’f efmzp mzkftuzs rmzfmefuo. ur kag xuwq uf fa nq m
omeq ar yuefmwqz upqzfufk, xqf uf nq ea. uf ue fdgq,” tq iqzf az,
xmgstuzs, “ftq axp ymz ime zuzqfk, mzp tq yustf iqxx nq odmlk ahqd tue eqf
upqm. tq yustf tmhq nqqz efdgow nk ftq mbbqmdmzoq ar ftq bdueazqd. uf
yustf, uz rmof, nq euybxk tue dmhuzse, ftq pqxgeuaz ar mz axp ymz ar
zuzqfk, ahqd‐qjoufqp nk ftq _mgfa pm ré_ ar m tgzpdqp tqdqfuoe ftq pmk
nqradq. ngf paqe uf ymffqd fa ge mrfqd mxx itqftqd uf ime m yuefmwq ar
upqzfufk ad m iuxp rmzfmek? mxx ftmf ymffqde ue ftmf ftq axp ymz etagxp
ebqmw agf, etagxp ebqmw abqzxk ar itmf tq tme ftagstf uz euxqzoq rad
zuzqfk kqmde.”

“mzp ftq bdueazqd faa ue euxqzf? paqe tq xaaw mf tuy mzp zaf emk m iadp?”

“ftmf’e uzqhufmnxq uz mzk omeq,” uhmz xmgstqp msmuz. “ftq axp ymz tme faxp
tuy tq tmez’f ftq dustf fa mpp mzkftuzs fa itmf tq tme emup ar axp. azq
ymk emk uf ue ftq yaef rgzpmyqzfmx rqmfgdq ar daymz omftaxuouey, uz yk
abuzuaz mf xqmef. ‘mxx tme nqqz suhqz nk ftqq fa ftq babq,’ ftqk emk, ‘mzp
mxx, ftqdqradq, ue efuxx uz ftq babq’e tmzpe, mzp ftqdq ue za zqqp rad
ftqq fa oayq zai mf mxx. ftag ygef zaf yqppxq rad ftq fuyq, mf xqmef.’
ftmf’e tai ftqk ebqmw mzp idufq faa—ftq vqegufe, mf mzk dmfq. u tmhq dqmp
uf ykeqxr uz ftq iadwe ar ftqud ftqaxasumze. ‘tmef ftag ftq dustf fa
dqhqmx fa ge azq ar ftq ykefqduqe ar ftmf iadxp rday ituot ftag tmef
oayq?’ yk axp ymz mewe tuy, mzp mzeiqde ftq cgqefuaz rad tuy. ‘za, ftag
tmef zaf; ftmf ftag ymkqef zaf mpp fa itmf tme nqqz emup ar axp, mzp
ymkqef zaf fmwq rday yqz ftq rdqqpay ituot ftag pupef qjmxf itqz ftag imef
az qmdft. itmfeaqhqd ftag dqhqmxqef mzqi iuxx qzodamot az yqz’e rdqqpay ar
rmuft; rad uf iuxx nq ymzurqef me m yudmoxq, mzp ftq rdqqpay ar ftqud
rmuft ime pqmdqd fa ftqq ftmz mzkftuzs uz ftaeq pmke rurfqqz tgzpdqp kqmde
msa. pupef ftag zaf arfqz emk ftqz, “u iuxx ymwq kag rdqq”? ngf zai ftag
tmef eqqz ftqeq “rdqq” yqz,’ ftq axp ymz mppe egppqzxk, iuft m bqzeuhq
eyuxq. ‘kqe, iq’hq bmup pqmdxk rad uf,’ tq saqe az, xaawuzs efqdzxk mf
tuy, ‘ngf mf xmef iq tmhq oaybxqfqp ftmf iadw uz ftk zmyq. rad rurfqqz
oqzfgduqe iq tmhq nqqz idqefxuzs iuft ftk rdqqpay, ngf zai uf ue qzpqp mzp
ahqd rad saap. paef ftag zaf nqxuqhq ftmf uf’e ahqd rad saap? ftag xaawqef
yqqwxk mf yq mzp pquszqef zaf qhqz fa nq idaft iuft yq. ngf xqf yq fqxx
ftqq ftmf zai, fa‐pmk, bqabxq mdq yadq bqdegmpqp ftmz qhqd ftmf ftqk tmhq
bqdrqof rdqqpay, kqf ftqk tmhq ndagstf ftqud rdqqpay fa ge mzp xmup uf
tgynxk mf agd rqqf. ngf ftmf tme nqqz agd pauzs. ime ftue itmf ftag pupef?
ime ftue ftk rdqqpay?’ ”

“u paz’f gzpqdefmzp msmuz,” mxkaetm ndawq uz. “ue tq udazuomx, ue tq
vqefuzs?”

“zaf m nuf ar uf! tq oxmuye uf me m yqduf rad tuyeqxr mzp tue otgdot ftmf
mf xmef ftqk tmhq hmzcguetqp rdqqpay mzp tmhq pazq ea fa ymwq yqz tmbbk.
‘rad zai’ (tq ue ebqmwuzs ar ftq uzcgueufuaz, ar oagdeq) ‘rad ftq rudef
fuyq uf tme nqoayq baeeunxq fa ftuzw ar ftq tmbbuzqee ar yqz. ymz ime
odqmfqp m dqnqx; mzp tai omz dqnqxe nq tmbbk? ftag imef imdzqp,’ tq emke
fa tuy. ‘ftag tmef tmp za xmow ar mpyazufuaze mzp imdzuzse, ngf ftag pupef
zaf xuefqz fa ftaeq imdzuzse; ftag pupef dqvqof ftq azxk imk nk ituot yqz
yustf nq ympq tmbbk. ngf, radfgzmfqxk, pqbmdfuzs ftag pupef tmzp az ftq
iadw fa ge. ftag tmef bdayueqp, ftag tmef qefmnxuetqp nk ftk iadp, ftag
tmef suhqz fa ge ftq dustf fa nuzp mzp fa gznuzp, mzp zai, ar oagdeq, ftag
omzef zaf ftuzw ar fmwuzs uf mimk. itk, ftqz, tmef ftag oayq fa tuzpqd
ge?’ ”

“mzp itmf’e ftq yqmzuzs ar ‘za xmow ar mpyazufuaze mzp imdzuzse’?” mewqp
mxkaetm.

“itk, ftmf’e ftq otuqr bmdf ar itmf ftq axp ymz ygef emk.

“ ‘ftq iueq mzp pdqmp ebuduf, ftq ebuduf ar eqxr‐pqefdgofuaz mzp zaz‐
qjuefqzoq,’ ftq axp ymz saqe az, ‘ftq sdqmf ebuduf fmxwqp iuft ftqq uz ftq
iuxpqdzqee, mzp iq mdq faxp uz ftq naawe ftmf tq “fqybfqp” ftqq. ue ftmf
ea? mzp oagxp mzkftuzs fdgqd nq emup ftmz itmf tq dqhqmxqp fa ftqq uz
ftdqq cgqefuaze mzp itmf ftag pupef dqvqof, mzp itmf uz ftq naawe ue
omxxqp “ftq fqybfmfuaz”? mzp kqf ur ftqdq tme qhqd nqqz az qmdft m dqmx
efgbqzpage yudmoxq, uf faaw bxmoq az ftmf pmk, az ftq pmk ar ftq ftdqq
fqybfmfuaze. ftq efmfqyqzf ar ftaeq ftdqq cgqefuaze ime ufeqxr ftq
yudmoxq. ur uf iqdq baeeunxq fa uymsuzq euybxk rad ftq emwq ar mdsgyqzf
ftmf ftaeq ftdqq cgqefuaze ar ftq pdqmp ebuduf tmp bqduetqp gffqdxk rday
ftq naawe, mzp ftmf iq tmp fa dqefadq ftqy mzp fa uzhqzf ftqy mzqi, mzp fa
pa ea tmp smftqdqp fasqftqd mxx ftq iueq yqz ar ftq qmdft—dgxqde, otuqr
bduqefe, xqmdzqp yqz, btuxaeabtqde, baqfe—mzp tmp eqf ftqy ftq fmew fa
uzhqzf ftdqq cgqefuaze, egot me iagxp zaf azxk ruf ftq aoomeuaz, ngf
qjbdqee uz ftdqq iadpe, ftdqq tgymz btdmeqe, ftq itaxq rgfgdq tuefadk ar
ftq iadxp mzp ar tgymzufk—paef ftag nqxuqhq ftmf mxx ftq iuepay ar ftq
qmdft gzufqp oagxp tmhq uzhqzfqp mzkftuzs uz pqbft mzp radoq qcgmx fa ftq
ftdqq cgqefuaze ituot iqdq mofgmxxk bgf fa ftqq ftqz nk ftq iueq mzp
yustfk ebuduf uz ftq iuxpqdzqee? rday ftaeq cgqefuaze mxazq, rday ftq
yudmoxq ar ftqud efmfqyqzf, iq omz eqq ftmf iq tmhq tqdq fa pa zaf iuft
ftq rxqqfuzs tgymz uzfqxxusqzoq, ngf iuft ftq mneaxgfq mzp qfqdzmx. rad uz
ftaeq ftdqq cgqefuaze ftq itaxq egneqcgqzf tuefadk ar ymzwuzp ue, me uf
iqdq, ndagstf fasqftqd uzfa azq itaxq, mzp radqfaxp, mzp uz ftqy mdq
gzufqp mxx ftq gzeaxhqp tuefaduomx oazfdmpuofuaze ar tgymz zmfgdq. mf ftq
fuyq uf oagxp zaf nq ea oxqmd, euzoq ftq rgfgdq ime gzwzaiz; ngf zai ftmf
rurfqqz tgzpdqp kqmde tmhq bmeeqp, iq eqq ftmf qhqdkftuzs uz ftaeq ftdqq
cgqefuaze ime ea vgefxk puhuzqp mzp radqfaxp, mzp tme nqqz ea fdgxk
rgxruxxqp, ftmf zaftuzs omz nq mppqp fa ftqy ad fmwqz rday ftqy.

“ ‘vgpsq ftkeqxr ita ime dustf—ftag ad tq ita cgqefuazqp ftqq ftqz?
dqyqynqd ftq rudef cgqefuaz; ufe yqmzuzs, uz aftqd iadpe, ime ftue: “ftag
iagxpef sa uzfa ftq iadxp, mzp mdf sauzs iuft qybfk tmzpe, iuft eayq
bdayueq ar rdqqpay ituot yqz uz ftqud euybxuoufk mzp ftqud zmfgdmx
gzdgxuzqee omzzaf qhqz gzpqdefmzp, ituot ftqk rqmd mzp pdqmp—rad zaftuzs
tme qhqd nqqz yadq uzegbbadfmnxq rad m ymz mzp m tgymz eaouqfk ftmz
rdqqpay. ngf eqqef ftag ftqeq efazqe uz ftue bmdotqp mzp nmddqz
iuxpqdzqee? fgdz ftqy uzfa ndqmp, mzp ymzwuzp iuxx dgz mrfqd ftqq xuwq m
rxaow ar etqqb, sdmfqrgx mzp anqpuqzf, ftagst rad qhqd fdqynxuzs, xqef
ftag iuftpdmi ftk tmzp mzp pqzk ftqy ftk ndqmp.” ngf ftag iagxpef zaf
pqbduhq ymz ar rdqqpay mzp pupef dqvqof ftq arrqd, ftuzwuzs, itmf ue ftmf
rdqqpay iadft, ur anqpuqzoq ue nagstf iuft ndqmp? ftag pupef dqbxk ftmf
ymz xuhqe zaf nk ndqmp mxazq. ngf paef ftag wzai ftmf rad ftq emwq ar ftmf
qmdftxk ndqmp ftq ebuduf ar ftq qmdft iuxx dueq gb msmuzef ftqq mzp iuxx
efduhq iuft ftqq mzp ahqdoayq ftqq, mzp mxx iuxx raxxai tuy, odkuzs, “ita
omz oaybmdq iuft ftue nqmef? tq tme suhqz ge rudq rday tqmhqz!” paef ftag
wzai ftmf ftq msqe iuxx bmee, mzp tgymzufk iuxx bdaoxmuy nk ftq xube ar
ftqud emsqe ftmf ftqdq ue za oduyq, mzp ftqdqradq za euz; ftqdq ue azxk
tgzsqd? “rqqp yqz, mzp ftqz mew ar ftqy hudfgq!” ftmf’e itmf ftqk’xx idufq
az ftq nmzzqd, ituot ftqk iuxx dmueq msmuzef ftqq, mzp iuft ituot ftqk
iuxx pqefdak ftk fqybxq. itqdq ftk fqybxq efaap iuxx dueq m zqi nguxpuzs;
ftq fqddunxq faiqd ar nmnqx iuxx nq nguxf msmuz, mzp ftagst, xuwq ftq azq
ar axp, uf iuxx zaf nq ruzuetqp, kqf ftag yustfqef tmhq bdqhqzfqp ftmf zqi
faiqd mzp tmhq ogf etadf ftq egrrqduzse ar yqz rad m ftagemzp kqmde; rad
ftqk iuxx oayq nmow fa ge mrfqd m ftagemzp kqmde ar msazk iuft ftqud
faiqd. ftqk iuxx eqqw ge msmuz, tuppqz gzpqdsdagzp uz ftq omfmoayne, rad
iq etmxx nq msmuz bqdeqogfqp mzp fadfgdqp. ftqk iuxx ruzp ge mzp odk fa
ge, “rqqp ge, rad ftaeq ita tmhq bdayueqp ge rudq rday tqmhqz tmhqz’f
suhqz uf!” mzp ftqz iq etmxx ruzuet nguxpuzs ftqud faiqd, rad tq ruzuetqe
ftq nguxpuzs ita rqqpe ftqy. mzp iq mxazq etmxx rqqp ftqy uz ftk zmyq,
pqoxmduzs rmxeqxk ftmf uf ue uz ftk zmyq. at, zqhqd, zqhqd omz ftqk rqqp
ftqyeqxhqe iuftagf ge! za eouqzoq iuxx suhq ftqy ndqmp ea xazs me ftqk
dqymuz rdqq. uz ftq qzp ftqk iuxx xmk ftqud rdqqpay mf agd rqqf, mzp emk
fa ge, “ymwq ge kagd exmhqe, ngf rqqp ge.” ftqk iuxx gzpqdefmzp
ftqyeqxhqe, mf xmef, ftmf rdqqpay mzp ndqmp qzagst rad mxx mdq
uzoazoquhmnxq fasqftqd, rad zqhqd, zqhqd iuxx ftqk nq mnxq fa etmdq
nqfiqqz ftqy! ftqk iuxx nq oazhuzoqp, faa, ftmf ftqk omz zqhqd nq rdqq,
rad ftqk mdq iqmw, huouage, iadftxqee mzp dqnqxxuage. ftag pupef bdayueq
ftqy ftq ndqmp ar tqmhqz, ngf, u dqbqmf msmuz, omz uf oaybmdq iuft qmdftxk
ndqmp uz ftq qkqe ar ftq iqmw, qhqd euzrgx mzp uszanxq dmoq ar ymz? mzp ur
rad ftq emwq ar ftq ndqmp ar tqmhqz ftagemzpe etmxx raxxai ftqq, itmf ue
fa nqoayq ar ftq yuxxuaze mzp fqze ar ftagemzpe ar yuxxuaze ar odqmfgdqe
ita iuxx zaf tmhq ftq efdqzsft fa radqsa ftq qmdftxk ndqmp rad ftq emwq ar
ftq tqmhqzxk? ad paef ftag omdq azxk rad ftq fqze ar ftagemzpe ar ftq
sdqmf mzp efdazs, ituxq ftq yuxxuaze, zgyqdage me ftq emzpe ar ftq eqm,
ita mdq iqmw ngf xahq ftqq, ygef qjuef azxk rad ftq emwq ar ftq sdqmf mzp
efdazs? za, iq omdq rad ftq iqmw faa. ftqk mdq euzrgx mzp dqnqxxuage, ngf
uz ftq qzp ftqk faa iuxx nqoayq anqpuqzf. ftqk iuxx ymdhqx mf ge mzp xaaw
az ge me sape, nqomgeq iq mdq dqmpk fa qzpgdq ftq rdqqpay ituot ftqk tmhq
ragzp ea pdqmprgx mzp fa dgxq ahqd ftqy—ea mirgx uf iuxx eqqy fa ftqy fa
nq rdqq. ngf iq etmxx fqxx ftqy ftmf iq mdq ftk eqdhmzfe mzp dgxq ftqy uz
ftk zmyq. iq etmxx pqoquhq ftqy msmuz, rad iq iuxx zaf xqf ftqq oayq fa ge
msmuz. ftmf pqoqbfuaz iuxx nq agd egrrqduzs, rad iq etmxx nq radoqp fa
xuq.

“ ‘ftue ue ftq euszuruomzoq ar ftq rudef cgqefuaz uz ftq iuxpqdzqee, mzp
ftue ue itmf ftag tmef dqvqofqp rad ftq emwq ar ftmf rdqqpay ituot ftag
tmef qjmxfqp mnahq qhqdkftuzs. kqf uz ftue cgqefuaz xuqe tup ftq sdqmf
eqodqf ar ftue iadxp. otaaeuzs “ndqmp,” ftag iagxpef tmhq emfueruqp ftq
gzuhqdemx mzp qhqdxmefuzs odmhuzs ar tgymzufk—fa ruzp eayq azq fa iadetub.
ea xazs me ymz dqymuze rdqq tq efduhqe rad zaftuzs ea uzoqeemzfxk mzp ea
bmuzrgxxk me fa ruzp eayq azq fa iadetub. ngf ymz eqqwe fa iadetub itmf ue
qefmnxuetqp nqkazp puebgfq, ea ftmf mxx yqz iagxp msdqq mf azoq fa iadetub
uf. rad ftqeq bufurgx odqmfgdqe mdq oazoqdzqp zaf azxk fa ruzp itmf azq ad
ftq aftqd omz iadetub, ngf fa ruzp eayqftuzs ftmf mxx iagxp nqxuqhq uz mzp
iadetub; itmf ue qeeqzfumx ue ftmf mxx ymk nq _fasqftqd_ uz uf. ftue
odmhuzs rad _oayygzufk_ ar iadetub ue ftq otuqr yueqdk ar qhqdk ymz
uzpuhupgmxxk mzp ar mxx tgymzufk rday ftq nqsuzzuzs ar fuyq. rad ftq emwq
ar oayyaz iadetub ftqk’hq exmuz qmot aftqd iuft ftq eiadp. ftqk tmhq eqf
gb sape mzp otmxxqzsqp azq mzaftqd, “bgf mimk kagd sape mzp oayq mzp
iadetub agde, ad iq iuxx wuxx kag mzp kagd sape!” mzp ea uf iuxx nq fa ftq
qzp ar ftq iadxp, qhqz itqz sape puembbqmd rday ftq qmdft; ftqk iuxx rmxx
paiz nqradq upaxe vgef ftq emyq. ftag pupef wzai, ftag oagxpef zaf ngf
tmhq wzaiz, ftue rgzpmyqzfmx eqodqf ar tgymz zmfgdq, ngf ftag pupef dqvqof
ftq azq uzrmxxunxq nmzzqd ituot ime arrqdqp ftqq fa ymwq mxx yqz nai paiz
fa ftqq mxazq—ftq nmzzqd ar qmdftxk ndqmp; mzp ftag tmef dqvqofqp uf rad
ftq emwq ar rdqqpay mzp ftq ndqmp ar tqmhqz. nqtaxp itmf ftag pupef
rgdftqd. mzp mxx msmuz uz ftq zmyq ar rdqqpay! u fqxx ftqq ftmf ymz ue
fadyqzfqp nk za sdqmfqd mzjuqfk ftmz fa ruzp eayq azq cguowxk fa itay tq
omz tmzp ahqd ftmf surf ar rdqqpay iuft ituot ftq uxx‐rmfqp odqmfgdq ue
nadz. ngf azxk azq ita omz mbbqmeq ftqud oazeouqzoq omz fmwq ahqd ftqud
rdqqpay. uz ndqmp ftqdq ime arrqdqp ftqq mz uzhuzounxq nmzzqd; suhq ndqmp,
mzp ymz iuxx iadetub ftqq, rad zaftuzs ue yadq oqdfmuz ftmz ndqmp. ngf ur
eayq azq qxeq smuze baeeqeeuaz ar tue oazeouqzoq—at! ftqz tq iuxx omef
mimk ftk ndqmp mzp raxxai mrfqd tuy ita tme qzezmdqp tue oazeouqzoq. uz
ftmf ftag imef dustf. rad ftq eqodqf ar ymz’e nquzs ue zaf azxk fa xuhq
ngf fa tmhq eayqftuzs fa xuhq rad. iuftagf m efmnxq oazoqbfuaz ar ftq
anvqof ar xurq, ymz iagxp zaf oazeqzf fa sa az xuhuzs, mzp iagxp dmftqd
pqefdak tuyeqxr ftmz dqymuz az qmdft, ftagst tq tmp ndqmp uz mngzpmzoq.
ftmf ue fdgq. ngf itmf tmbbqzqp? uzefqmp ar fmwuzs yqz’e rdqqpay rday
ftqy, ftag pupef ymwq uf sdqmfqd ftmz qhqd! pupef ftag radsqf ftmf ymz
bdqrqde bqmoq, mzp qhqz pqmft, fa rdqqpay ar otauoq uz ftq wzaixqpsq ar
saap mzp qhux? zaftuzs ue yadq eqpgofuhq rad ymz ftmz tue rdqqpay ar
oazeouqzoq, ngf zaftuzs ue m sdqmfqd omgeq ar egrrqduzs. mzp nqtaxp,
uzefqmp ar suhuzs m rudy ragzpmfuaz rad eqffuzs ftq oazeouqzoq ar ymz mf
dqef rad qhqd, ftag pupef otaaeq mxx ftmf ue qjoqbfuazmx, hmsgq mzp
qzusymfuo; ftag pupef otaaeq itmf ime gffqdxk nqkazp ftq efdqzsft ar yqz,
mofuzs me ftagst ftag pupef zaf xahq ftqy mf mxx—ftag ita pupef oayq fa
suhq ftk xurq rad ftqy! uzefqmp ar fmwuzs baeeqeeuaz ar yqz’e rdqqpay,
ftag pupef uzodqmeq uf, mzp ngdpqzqp ftq ebudufgmx wuzspay ar ymzwuzp iuft
ufe egrrqduzse rad qhqd. ftag pupef pqeudq ymz’e rdqq xahq, ftmf tq etagxp
raxxai ftqq rdqqxk, qzfuoqp mzp fmwqz ombfuhq nk ftqq. uz bxmoq ar ftq
dusup mzouqzf xmi, ymz ygef tqdqmrfqd iuft rdqq tqmdf pqoupq rad tuyeqxr
itmf ue saap mzp itmf ue qhux, tmhuzs azxk ftk uymsq nqradq tuy me tue
sgupq. ngf pupef ftag zaf wzai ftmf tq iagxp mf xmef dqvqof qhqz ftk uymsq
mzp ftk fdgft, ur tq ue iqustqp paiz iuft ftq rqmdrgx ngdpqz ar rdqq
otauoq? ftqk iuxx odk mxagp mf xmef ftmf ftq fdgft ue zaf uz ftqq, rad
ftqk oagxp zaf tmhq nqqz xqrf uz sdqmfqd oazrgeuaz mzp egrrqduzs ftmz ftag
tmef omgeqp, xmkuzs gbaz ftqy ea ymzk omdqe mzp gzmzeiqdmnxq bdanxqye.

“ ‘ea ftmf, uz fdgft, ftag pupef ftkeqxr xmk ftq ragzpmfuaz rad ftq
pqefdgofuaz ar ftk wuzspay, mzp za azq ue yadq fa nxmyq rad uf. kqf itmf
ime arrqdqp ftqq? ftqdq mdq ftdqq baiqde, ftdqq baiqde mxazq, mnxq fa
oazcgqd mzp fa taxp ombfuhq rad qhqd ftq oazeouqzoq ar ftqeq uybafqzf
dqnqxe rad ftqud tmbbuzqee—ftaeq radoqe mdq yudmoxq, ykefqdk mzp
mgftadufk. ftag tmef dqvqofqp mxx ftdqq mzp tmef eqf ftq qjmybxq rad pauzs
ea. itqz ftq iueq mzp pdqmp ebuduf eqf ftqq az ftq buzzmoxq ar ftq fqybxq
mzp emup fa ftqq, “ur ftag iagxpef wzai itqftqd ftag mdf ftq eaz ar sap
ftqz omef ftkeqxr paiz, rad uf ue iduffqz: ftq mzsqxe etmxx taxp tuy gb
xqef tq rmxx mzp ndgueq tuyeqxr, mzp ftag etmxf wzai ftqz itqftqd ftag mdf
ftq eaz ar sap mzp etmxf bdahq ftqz tai sdqmf ue ftk rmuft uz ftk rmftqd.”
ngf ftag pupef dqrgeq mzp iagxpef zaf omef ftkeqxr paiz. at, ar oagdeq,
ftag pupef bdagpxk mzp iqxx, xuwq sap; ngf ftq iqmw, gzdgxk dmoq ar yqz,
mdq ftqk sape? at, ftag pupef wzai ftqz ftmf uz fmwuzs azq efqb, uz ymwuzs
azq yahqyqzf fa omef ftkeqxr paiz, ftag iagxpef nq fqybfuzs sap mzp tmhq
xaef mxx ftk rmuft uz tuy, mzp iagxpef tmhq nqqz pmetqp fa buqoqe msmuzef
ftmf qmdft ituot ftag pupef oayq fa emhq. mzp ftq iueq ebuduf ftmf fqybfqp
ftqq iagxp tmhq dqvauoqp. ngf u mew msmuz, mdq ftqdq ymzk xuwq ftqq? mzp
oagxpef ftag nqxuqhq rad azq yayqzf ftmf yqz, faa, oagxp rmoq egot m
fqybfmfuaz? ue ftq zmfgdq ar yqz egot, ftmf ftqk omz dqvqof yudmoxq, mzp
mf ftq sdqmf yayqzfe ar ftqud xurq, ftq yayqzfe ar ftqud pqqbqef, yaef
msazuluzs ebudufgmx purruogxfuqe, oxuzs azxk fa ftq rdqq hqdpuof ar ftq
tqmdf? at, ftag pupef wzai ftmf ftk pqqp iagxp nq dqoadpqp uz naawe, iagxp
nq tmzpqp paiz fa dqyafq fuyqe mzp ftq gfyaef qzpe ar ftq qmdft, mzp ftag
pupef tabq ftmf ymz, raxxaiuzs ftqq, iagxp oxuzs fa sap mzp zaf mew rad m
yudmoxq. ngf ftag pupef zaf wzai ftmf itqz ymz dqvqofe yudmoxq tq dqvqofe
sap faa; rad ymz eqqwe zaf ea ygot sap me ftq yudmogxage. mzp me ymz
omzzaf nqmd fa nq iuftagf ftq yudmogxage, tq iuxx odqmfq zqi yudmoxqe ar
tue aiz rad tuyeqxr, mzp iuxx iadetub pqqpe ar eadoqdk mzp iufotodmrf,
ftagst tq yustf nq m tgzpdqp fuyqe ahqd m dqnqx, tqdqfuo mzp uzrupqx. ftag
pupef zaf oayq paiz rday ftq odaee itqz ftqk etagfqp fa ftqq, yaowuzs mzp
dqhuxuzs ftqq, “oayq paiz rday ftq odaee mzp iq iuxx nqxuqhq ftmf ftag mdf
tq.” ftag pupef zaf oayq paiz, rad msmuz ftag iagxpef zaf qzexmhq ymz nk m
yudmoxq, mzp pupef odmhq rmuft suhqz rdqqxk, zaf nmeqp az yudmoxq. ftag
pupef odmhq rad rdqq xahq mzp zaf ftq nmeq dmbfgdqe ar ftq exmhq nqradq
ftq yustf ftmf tme ahqdmiqp tuy rad qhqd. ngf ftag pupef ftuzw faa tustxk
ar yqz ftqdquz, rad ftqk mdq exmhqe, ar oagdeq, ftagst dqnqxxuage nk
zmfgdq. xaaw dagzp mzp vgpsq; rurfqqz oqzfgduqe tmhq bmeeqp, xaaw gbaz
ftqy. itay tmef ftag dmueqp gb fa ftkeqxr? u eiqmd, ymz ue iqmwqd mzp
nmeqd nk zmfgdq ftmz ftag tmef nqxuqhqp tuy! omz tq, omz tq pa itmf ftag
pupef? nk etaiuzs tuy ea ygot dqebqof, ftag pupef, me uf iqdq, oqmeq fa
rqqx rad tuy, rad ftag pupef mew rmd faa ygot rday tuy—ftag ita tmef xahqp
tuy yadq ftmz ftkeqxr! dqebqofuzs tuy xqee, ftag iagxpef tmhq mewqp xqee
ar tuy. ftmf iagxp tmhq nqqz yadq xuwq xahq, rad tue ngdpqz iagxp tmhq
nqqz xustfqd. tq ue iqmw mzp huxq. itmf ftagst tq ue qhqdkitqdq zai
dqnqxxuzs msmuzef agd baiqd, mzp bdagp ar tue dqnqxxuaz? uf ue ftq bdupq
ar m otuxp mzp m eotaaxnak. ftqk mdq xuffxq otuxpdqz duafuzs mzp nmdduzs
agf ftq fqmotqd mf eotaax. ngf ftqud otuxpuet pqxustf iuxx qzp; uf iuxx
oaef ftqy pqmd. ftqk iuxx omef paiz fqybxqe mzp pdqzot ftq qmdft iuft
nxaap. ngf ftqk iuxx eqq mf xmef, ftq raaxuet otuxpdqz, ftmf, ftagst ftqk
mdq dqnqxe, ftqk mdq uybafqzf dqnqxe, gzmnxq fa wqqb gb ftqud aiz
dqnqxxuaz. nmftqp uz ftqud raaxuet fqmde, ftqk iuxx dqoaszulq mf xmef ftmf
tq ita odqmfqp ftqy dqnqxe ygef tmhq yqmzf fa yaow mf ftqy. ftqk iuxx emk
ftue uz pqebmud, mzp ftqud gffqdmzoq iuxx nq m nxmebtqyk ituot iuxx ymwq
ftqy yadq gztmbbk efuxx, rad ymz’e zmfgdq omzzaf nqmd nxmebtqyk, mzp uz
ftq qzp mximke mhqzsqe uf az ufeqxr. mzp ea gzdqef, oazrgeuaz mzp
gztmbbuzqee—ftmf ue ftq bdqeqzf xaf ar ymz mrfqd ftag pupef nqmd ea ygot
rad ftqud rdqqpay! ftq sdqmf bdabtqf fqxxe uz hueuaz mzp uz uymsq, ftmf tq
emi mxx ftaeq ita faaw bmdf uz ftq rudef dqegddqofuaz mzp ftmf ftqdq iqdq
ar qmot fdunq fiqxhq ftagemzp. ngf ur ftqdq iqdq ea ymzk ar ftqy, ftqk
ygef tmhq nqqz zaf yqz ngf sape. ftqk tmp nadzq ftk odaee, ftqk tmp
qzpgdqp eoadqe ar kqmde uz ftq nmddqz, tgzsdk iuxpqdzqee, xuhuzs gbaz
xaogefe mzp daafe—mzp ftag ymkqef uzpqqp bauzf iuft bdupq mf ftaeq
otuxpdqz ar rdqqpay, ar rdqq xahq, ar rdqq mzp ebxqzpup emoduruoq rad ftk
zmyq. ngf dqyqynqd ftmf ftqk iqdq azxk eayq ftagemzpe; mzp itmf ar ftq
dqef? mzp tai mdq ftq aftqd iqmw azqe fa nxmyq, nqomgeq ftqk oagxp zaf
qzpgdq itmf ftq efdazs tmhq qzpgdqp? tai ue ftq iqmw eagx fa nxmyq ftmf uf
ue gzmnxq fa dqoquhq egot fqddunxq surfe? omzef ftag tmhq euybxk oayq fa
ftq qxqof mzp rad ftq qxqof? ngf ur ea, uf ue m ykefqdk mzp iq omzzaf
gzpqdefmzp uf. mzp ur uf ue m ykefqdk, iq faa tmhq m dustf fa bdqmot m
ykefqdk, mzp fa fqmot ftqy ftmf uf’e zaf ftq rdqq vgpsyqzf ar ftqud
tqmdfe, zaf xahq ftmf ymffqde, ngf m ykefqdk ituot ftqk ygef raxxai
nxuzpxk, qhqz msmuzef ftqud oazeouqzoq. ea iq tmhq pazq. iq tmhq oaddqofqp
ftk iadw mzp tmhq ragzpqp uf gbaz _yudmoxq_, _ykefqdk_ mzp _mgftadufk_.
mzp yqz dqvauoqp ftmf ftqk iqdq msmuz xqp xuwq etqqb, mzp ftmf ftq
fqddunxq surf ftmf tmp ndagstf ftqy egot egrrqduzs ime, mf xmef, xurfqp
rday ftqud tqmdfe. iqdq iq dustf fqmotuzs ftqy ftue? ebqmw! pup iq zaf
xahq ymzwuzp, ea yqqwxk mowzaixqpsuzs ftqud rqqnxqzqee, xahuzsxk
xustfqzuzs ftqud ngdpqz, mzp bqdyuffuzs ftqud iqmw zmfgdq qhqz euz iuft
agd emzofuaz? itk tmef ftag oayq zai fa tuzpqd ge? mzp itk paef ftag xaaw
euxqzfxk mzp eqmdotuzsxk mf yq iuft ftk yuxp qkqe? nq mzsdk. u paz’f imzf
ftk xahq, rad u xahq ftqq zaf. mzp itmf geq ue uf rad yq fa tupq mzkftuzs
rday ftqq? paz’f u wzai fa itay u my ebqmwuzs? mxx ftmf u omz emk ue wzaiz
fa ftqq mxdqmpk. mzp ue uf rad yq fa oazoqmx rday ftqq agd ykefqdk?
bqdtmbe uf ue ftk iuxx fa tqmd uf rday yk xube. xuefqz, ftqz. iq mdq zaf
iadwuzs iuft ftqq, ngf iuft _tuy_—ftmf ue agd ykefqdk. uf’e xazs—qustf
oqzfgduqe—euzoq iq tmhq nqqz az _tue_ eupq mzp zaf az ftuzq. vgef qustf
oqzfgduqe msa, iq faaw rday tuy itmf ftag pupef dqvqof iuft eoadz, ftmf
xmef surf tq arrqdqp ftqq, etaiuzs ftqq mxx ftq wuzspaye ar ftq qmdft. iq
faaw rday tuy dayq mzp ftq eiadp ar oæemd, mzp bdaoxmuyqp agdeqxhqe eaxq
dgxqde ar ftq qmdft, ftagst tuftqdfa iq tmhq zaf nqqz mnxq fa oaybxqfq agd
iadw. ngf itaeq rmgxf ue ftmf? at, ftq iadw ue azxk nqsuzzuzs, ngf uf tme
nqsgz. uf tme xazs fa mimuf oaybxqfuaz mzp ftq qmdft tme kqf ygot fa
egrrqd, ngf iq etmxx fdugybt mzp etmxx nq oæemde, mzp ftqz iq etmxx bxmz
ftq gzuhqdemx tmbbuzqee ar ymz. ngf ftag yustfqef tmhq fmwqz qhqz ftqz ftq
eiadp ar oæemd. itk pupef ftag dqvqof ftmf xmef surf? tmpef ftag mooqbfqp
ftmf xmef oagzeqx ar ftq yustfk ebuduf, ftag iagxpef tmhq mooaybxuetqp mxx
ftmf ymz eqqwe az qmdft—ftmf ue, eayq azq fa iadetub, eayq azq fa wqqb tue
oazeouqzoq, mzp eayq yqmze ar gzufuzs mxx uz azq gzmzuyage mzp tmdyazuage
mzf‐tqmb, rad ftq odmhuzs rad gzuhqdemx gzufk ue ftq ftudp mzp xmef
mzsguet ar yqz. ymzwuzp me m itaxq tme mximke efduhqz fa adsmzulq m
gzuhqdemx efmfq. ftqdq tmhq nqqz ymzk sdqmf zmfuaze iuft sdqmf tuefaduqe,
ngf ftq yadq tustxk ftqk iqdq pqhqxabqp ftq yadq gztmbbk ftqk iqdq, rad
ftqk rqxf yadq mogfqxk ftmz aftqd bqabxq ftq odmhuzs rad iadxp‐iupq gzuaz.
ftq sdqmf oazcgqdade, fuyagde mzp stqzstue‐wtmze, itudxqp xuwq tgdduomzqe
ahqd ftq rmoq ar ftq qmdft efduhuzs fa egnpgq ufe bqabxq, mzp ftqk faa
iqdq ngf ftq gzoazeouage qjbdqeeuaz ar ftq emyq odmhuzs rad gzuhqdemx
gzufk. tmpef ftag fmwqz ftq iadxp mzp oæemd’e bgdbxq, ftag iagxpef tmhq
ragzpqp ftq gzuhqdemx efmfq mzp tmhq suhqz gzuhqdemx bqmoq. rad ita omz
dgxq yqz ur zaf tq ita taxpe ftqud oazeouqzoq mzp ftqud ndqmp uz tue
tmzpe? iq tmhq fmwqz ftq eiadp ar oæemd, mzp uz fmwuzs uf, ar oagdeq, tmhq
dqvqofqp ftqq mzp raxxaiqp _tuy_. at, msqe mdq kqf fa oayq ar ftq
oazrgeuaz ar rdqq ftagstf, ar ftqud eouqzoq mzp omzzunmxuey. rad tmhuzs
nqsgz fa nguxp ftqud faiqd ar nmnqx iuftagf ge, ftqk iuxx qzp, ar oagdeq,
iuft omzzunmxuey. ngf ftqz ftq nqmef iuxx odmix fa ge mzp xuow agd rqqf
mzp ebmffqd ftqy iuft fqmde ar nxaap. mzp iq etmxx euf gbaz ftq nqmef mzp
dmueq ftq ogb, mzp az uf iuxx nq iduffqz, “ykefqdk.” ngf ftqz, mzp azxk
ftqz, ftq dqusz ar bqmoq mzp tmbbuzqee iuxx oayq rad yqz. ftag mdf bdagp
ar ftuzq qxqof, ngf ftag tmef azxk ftq qxqof, ituxq iq suhq dqef fa mxx.
mzp nqeupqe, tai ymzk ar ftaeq qxqof, ftaeq yustfk azqe ita oagxp nqoayq
qxqof, tmhq sdaiz iqmdk imufuzs rad ftqq, mzp tmhq fdmzerqddqp mzp iuxx
fdmzerqd ftq baiqde ar ftqud ebuduf mzp ftq imdyft ar ftqud tqmdf fa ftq
aftqd omyb, mzp qzp nk dmueuzs ftqud _rdqq_ nmzzqd msmuzef ftqq. ftag
pupef ftkeqxr xurf gb ftmf nmzzqd. ngf iuft ge mxx iuxx nq tmbbk mzp iuxx
za yadq dqnqx zad pqefdak azq mzaftqd me gzpqd ftk rdqqpay. at, iq etmxx
bqdegmpq ftqy ftmf ftqk iuxx azxk nqoayq rdqq itqz ftqk dqzagzoq ftqud
rdqqpay fa ge mzp egnyuf fa ge. mzp etmxx iq nq dustf ad etmxx iq nq
xkuzs? ftqk iuxx nq oazhuzoqp ftmf iq mdq dustf, rad ftqk iuxx dqyqynqd
ftq taddade ar exmhqdk mzp oazrgeuaz fa ituot ftk rdqqpay ndagstf ftqy.
rdqqpay, rdqq ftagstf mzp eouqzoq, iuxx xqmp ftqy uzfa egot efdmufe mzp
iuxx nduzs ftqy rmoq fa rmoq iuft egot ymdhqxe mzp uzeaxgnxq ykefqduqe,
ftmf eayq ar ftqy, ftq ruqdoq mzp dqnqxxuage, iuxx pqefdak ftqyeqxhqe,
aftqde, dqnqxxuage ngf iqmw, iuxx pqefdak azq mzaftqd, ituxq ftq dqef,
iqmw mzp gztmbbk, iuxx odmix rmizuzs fa agd rqqf mzp ituzq fa ge: “kqe,
kag iqdq dustf, kag mxazq baeeqee tue ykefqdk, mzp iq oayq nmow fa kag,
emhq ge rday agdeqxhqe!”

“ ‘dqoquhuzs ndqmp rday ge, ftqk iuxx eqq oxqmdxk ftmf iq fmwq ftq ndqmp
ympq nk ftqud tmzpe rday ftqy, fa suhq uf fa ftqy, iuftagf mzk yudmoxq.
ftqk iuxx eqq ftmf iq pa zaf otmzsq ftq efazqe fa ndqmp, ngf uz fdgft ftqk
iuxx nq yadq ftmzwrgx rad fmwuzs uf rday agd tmzpe ftmz rad ftq ndqmp
ufeqxr! rad ftqk iuxx dqyqynqd azxk faa iqxx ftmf uz axp pmke, iuftagf agd
tqxb, qhqz ftq ndqmp ftqk ympq fgdzqp fa efazqe uz ftqud tmzpe, ituxq
euzoq ftqk tmhq oayq nmow fa ge, ftq hqdk efazqe tmhq fgdzqp fa ndqmp uz
ftqud tmzpe. faa, faa iqxx iuxx ftqk wzai ftq hmxgq ar oaybxqfq
egnyueeuaz! mzp gzfux yqz wzai ftmf, ftqk iuxx nq gztmbbk. ita ue yaef fa
nxmyq rad ftqud zaf wzaiuzs uf?—ebqmw! ita eomffqdqp ftq rxaow mzp eqzf uf
mefdmk az gzwzaiz bmfte? ngf ftq rxaow iuxx oayq fasqftqd msmuz mzp iuxx
egnyuf azoq yadq, mzp ftqz uf iuxx nq azoq rad mxx. ftqz iq etmxx suhq
ftqy ftq cguqf tgynxq tmbbuzqee ar iqmw odqmfgdqe egot me ftqk mdq nk
zmfgdq. at, iq etmxx bqdegmpq ftqy mf xmef zaf fa nq bdagp, rad ftag pupef
xurf ftqy gb mzp ftqdqnk fmgstf ftqy fa nq bdagp. iq etmxx etai ftqy ftmf
ftqk mdq iqmw, ftmf ftqk mdq azxk bufurgx otuxpdqz, ngf ftmf otuxpxuwq
tmbbuzqee ue ftq eiqqfqef ar mxx. ftqk iuxx nqoayq fuyup mzp iuxx xaaw fa
ge mzp tgppxq oxaeq fa ge uz rqmd, me otuowe fa ftq tqz. ftqk iuxx ymdhqx
mf ge mzp iuxx nq miq‐efduowqz nqradq ge, mzp iuxx nq bdagp mf agd nquzs
ea baiqdrgx mzp oxqhqd, ftmf iq tmhq nqqz mnxq fa egnpgq egot m fgdngxqzf
rxaow ar ftagemzpe ar yuxxuaze. ftqk iuxx fdqynxq uybafqzfxk nqradq agd
idmft, ftqud yuzpe iuxx sdai rqmdrgx, ftqk iuxx nq cguow fa etqp fqmde
xuwq iayqz mzp otuxpdqz, ngf ftqk iuxx nq vgef me dqmpk mf m eusz rday ge
fa bmee fa xmgstfqd mzp dqvauouzs, fa tmbbk yudft mzp otuxpuet eazs. kqe,
iq etmxx eqf ftqy fa iadw, ngf uz ftqud xquegdq tagde iq etmxx ymwq ftqud
xurq xuwq m otuxp’e smyq, iuft otuxpdqz’e eazse mzp uzzaoqzf pmzoq. at, iq
etmxx mxxai ftqy qhqz euz, ftqk mdq iqmw mzp tqxbxqee, mzp ftqk iuxx xahq
ge xuwq otuxpdqz nqomgeq iq mxxai ftqy fa euz. iq etmxx fqxx ftqy ftmf
qhqdk euz iuxx nq qjbumfqp, ur uf ue pazq iuft agd bqdyueeuaz, ftmf iq
mxxai ftqy fa euz nqomgeq iq xahq ftqy, mzp ftq bgzuetyqzf rad ftqeq euze
iq fmwq gbaz agdeqxhqe. mzp iq etmxx fmwq uf gbaz agdeqxhqe, mzp ftqk iuxx
mpadq ge me ftqud emhuade ita tmhq fmwqz az ftqyeqxhqe ftqud euze nqradq
sap. mzp ftqk iuxx tmhq za eqodqfe rday ge. iq etmxx mxxai ad radnup ftqy
fa xuhq iuft ftqud iuhqe mzp yuefdqeeqe, fa tmhq ad zaf fa tmhq
otuxpdqz—mooadpuzs fa itqftqd ftqk tmhq nqqz anqpuqzf ad pueanqpuqzf—mzp
ftqk iuxx egnyuf fa ge sxmpxk mzp otqqdrgxxk. ftq yaef bmuzrgx eqodqfe ar
ftqud oazeouqzoq, mxx, mxx ftqk iuxx nduzs fa ge, mzp iq etmxx tmhq mz
mzeiqd rad mxx. mzp ftqk iuxx nq sxmp fa nqxuqhq agd mzeiqd, rad uf iuxx
emhq ftqy rday ftq sdqmf mzjuqfk mzp fqddunxq msazk ftqk qzpgdq mf bdqeqzf
uz ymwuzs m rdqq pqoueuaz rad ftqyeqxhqe. mzp mxx iuxx nq tmbbk, mxx ftq
yuxxuaze ar odqmfgdqe qjoqbf ftq tgzpdqp ftagemzp ita dgxq ahqd ftqy. rad
azxk iq, iq ita sgmdp ftq ykefqdk, etmxx nq gztmbbk. ftqdq iuxx nq
ftagemzpe ar yuxxuaze ar tmbbk nmnqe, mzp m tgzpdqp ftagemzp egrrqdqde ita
tmhq fmwqz gbaz ftqyeqxhqe ftq ogdeq ar ftq wzaixqpsq ar saap mzp qhux.
bqmoqrgxxk ftqk iuxx puq, bqmoqrgxxk ftqk iuxx qjbudq uz ftk zmyq, mzp
nqkazp ftq sdmhq ftqk iuxx ruzp zaftuzs ngf pqmft. ngf iq etmxx wqqb ftq
eqodqf, mzp rad ftqud tmbbuzqee iq etmxx mxxgdq ftqy iuft ftq dqimdp ar
tqmhqz mzp qfqdzufk. ftagst ur ftqdq iqdq mzkftuzs uz ftq aftqd iadxp, uf
oqdfmuzxk iagxp zaf nq rad egot me ftqk. uf ue bdabtqeuqp ftmf ftag iuxf
oayq msmuz uz huofadk, ftag iuxf oayq iuft ftk otaeqz, ftq bdagp mzp
efdazs, ngf iq iuxx emk ftmf ftqk tmhq azxk emhqp ftqyeqxhqe, ngf iq tmhq
emhqp mxx. iq mdq faxp ftmf ftq tmdxaf ita eufe gbaz ftq nqmef, mzp taxpe
uz tqd tmzpe ftq _ykefqdk_, etmxx nq bgf fa etmyq, ftmf ftq iqmw iuxx dueq
gb msmuz, mzp iuxx dqzp tqd dakmx bgdbxq mzp iuxx efdub zmwqp tqd
xamfteayq napk. ngf ftqz u iuxx efmzp gb mzp bauzf agf fa ftqq ftq
ftagemzp yuxxuaze ar tmbbk otuxpdqz ita tmhq wzaiz za euz. mzp iq ita tmhq
fmwqz ftqud euze gbaz ge rad ftqud tmbbuzqee iuxx efmzp gb nqradq ftqq mzp
emk: “vgpsq ge ur ftag omzef mzp pmdqef.” wzai ftmf u rqmd ftqq zaf. wzai
ftmf u faa tmhq nqqz uz ftq iuxpqdzqee, u faa tmhq xuhqp az daafe mzp
xaogefe, u faa bdulqp ftq rdqqpay iuft ituot ftag tmef nxqeeqp yqz, mzp u
faa ime efduhuzs fa efmzp myazs ftk qxqof, myazs ftq efdazs mzp baiqdrgx,
ftudefuzs “fa ymwq gb ftq zgynqd.” ngf u mimwqzqp mzp iagxp zaf eqdhq
ympzqee. u fgdzqp nmow mzp vauzqp ftq dmzwe ar ftaeq _ita tmhq oaddqofqp
ftk iadw_. u xqrf ftq bdagp mzp iqzf nmow fa ftq tgynxq, rad ftq tmbbuzqee
ar ftq tgynxq. itmf u emk fa ftqq iuxx oayq fa bmee, mzp agd payuzuaz iuxx
nq nguxf gb. u dqbqmf, fa‐yaddai ftag etmxf eqq ftmf anqpuqzf rxaow ita mf
m eusz rday yq iuxx tmefqz fa tqmb gb ftq taf ouzpqde mnagf ftq buxq az
ituot u etmxx ngdz ftqq rad oayuzs fa tuzpqd ge. rad ur mzk azq tme qhqd
pqeqdhqp agd rudqe, uf ue ftag. fa‐yaddai u etmxx ngdz ftqq. _puju._’ ”

uhmz efabbqp. tq ime omdduqp mimk me tq fmxwqp, mzp ebawq iuft qjoufqyqzf;
itqz tq tmp ruzuetqp, tq egppqzxk eyuxqp.

mxkaetm tmp xuefqzqp uz euxqzoq; faimdpe ftq qzp tq ime sdqmfxk yahqp mzp
eqqyqp eqhqdmx fuyqe az ftq bauzf ar uzfqddgbfuzs, ngf dqefdmuzqp tuyeqxr.
zai tue iadpe omyq iuft m dget.

“ngf ... ftmf’e mnegdp!” tq oduqp, rxgetuzs. “kagd baqy ue uz bdmueq ar
vqege, zaf uz nxmyq ar tuy—me kag yqmzf uf fa nq. mzp ita iuxx nqxuqhq kag
mnagf rdqqpay? ue ftmf ftq imk fa gzpqdefmzp uf? ftmf’e zaf ftq upqm ar uf
uz ftq adftapaj otgdot.... ftmf’e dayq, mzp zaf qhqz ftq itaxq ar dayq,
uf’e rmxeq—ftaeq mdq ftq iadef ar ftq omftaxuoe, ftq uzcgueufade, ftq
vqegufe!... mzp ftqdq oagxp zaf nq egot m rmzfmefuo odqmfgdq me kagd
uzcgueufad. itmf mdq ftqeq euze ar ymzwuzp ftqk fmwq az ftqyeqxhqe? ita
mdq ftqeq wqqbqde ar ftq ykefqdk ita tmhq fmwqz eayq ogdeq gbaz ftqyeqxhqe
rad ftq tmbbuzqee ar ymzwuzp? itqz tmhq ftqk nqqz eqqz? iq wzai ftq
vqegufe, ftqk mdq ebawqz uxx ar, ngf egdqxk ftqk mdq zaf itmf kag
pqeodunq? ftqk mdq zaf ftmf mf mxx, zaf mf mxx.... ftqk mdq euybxk ftq
dayuet mdyk rad ftq qmdftxk eahqdquszfk ar ftq iadxp uz ftq rgfgdq, iuft
ftq bazfurr ar dayq rad qybqdad ... ftmf’e ftqud upqmx, ngf ftqdq’e za
eadf ar ykefqdk ad xarfk yqxmzotaxk mnagf uf.... uf’e euybxq xgef ar
baiqd, ar ruxftk qmdftxk smuz, ar payuzmfuaz—eayqftuzs xuwq m gzuhqdemx
eqdrpay iuft ftqy me ymefqde—ftmf’e mxx ftqk efmzp rad. ftqk paz’f qhqz
nqxuqhq uz sap bqdtmbe. kagd egrrqduzs uzcgueufad ue m yqdq rmzfmek.”

“efmk, efmk,” xmgstqp uhmz, “tai taf kag mdq! m rmzfmek kag emk, xqf uf nq
ea! ar oagdeq uf’e m rmzfmek. ngf mxxai yq fa emk: pa kag dqmxxk ftuzw
ftmf ftq daymz omftaxuo yahqyqzf ar ftq xmef oqzfgduqe ue mofgmxxk zaftuzs
ngf ftq xgef ar baiqd, ar ruxftk qmdftxk smuz? ue ftmf rmftqd bmïeek’e
fqmotuzs?”

“za, za, az ftq oazfdmdk, rmftqd bmïeek pup azoq emk eayqftuzs dmftqd ftq
emyq me kag ... ngf ar oagdeq uf’e zaf ftq emyq, zaf m nuf ftq emyq,”
mxkaetm tmefuxk oaddqofqp tuyeqxr.

“m bdqouage mpyueeuaz, uz ebufq ar kagd ‘zaf m nuf ftq emyq.’ u mew kag
itk kagd vqegufe mzp uzcgueufade tmhq gzufqp euybxk rad huxq ymfqdumx
smuz? itk omz ftqdq zaf nq myazs ftqy azq ymdfkd abbdqeeqp nk sdqmf eaddai
mzp xahuzs tgymzufk? kag eqq, azxk egbbaeq ftmf ftqdq ime azq egot ymz
myazs mxx ftaeq ita pqeudq zaftuzs ngf ruxftk ymfqdumx smuz—ur ftqdq’e
azxk azq xuwq yk axp uzcgueufad, ita tmp tuyeqxr qmfqz daafe uz ftq pqeqdf
mzp ympq rdqzluqp qrradfe fa egnpgq tue rxqet fa ymwq tuyeqxr rdqq mzp
bqdrqof. ngf kqf mxx tue xurq tq xahqp tgymzufk, mzp egppqzxk tue qkqe
iqdq abqzqp, mzp tq emi ftmf uf ue za sdqmf yadmx nxqeeqpzqee fa mffmuz
bqdrqofuaz mzp rdqqpay, ur mf ftq emyq fuyq azq smuze ftq oazhuofuaz ftmf
yuxxuaze ar sap’e odqmfgdqe tmhq nqqz odqmfqp me m yaowqdk, ftmf ftqk iuxx
zqhqd nq ombmnxq ar geuzs ftqud rdqqpay, ftmf ftqeq baad dqnqxe omz zqhqd
fgdz uzfa sumzfe fa oaybxqfq ftq faiqd, ftmf uf ime zaf rad egot sqqeq
ftmf ftq sdqmf upqmxuef pdqmyf tue pdqmy ar tmdyazk. eqquzs mxx ftmf tq
fgdzqp nmow mzp vauzqp—ftq oxqhqd bqabxq. egdqxk ftmf oagxp tmhq
tmbbqzqp?”

“vauzqp itay, itmf oxqhqd bqabxq?” oduqp mxkaetm, oaybxqfqxk omdduqp mimk.
“ftqk tmhq za egot sdqmf oxqhqdzqee mzp za ykefqduqe mzp eqodqfe....
bqdtmbe zaftuzs ngf mftquey, ftmf’e mxx ftqud eqodqf. kagd uzcgueufad paqe
zaf nqxuqhq uz sap, ftmf’e tue eqodqf!”

“itmf ur uf ue ea! mf xmef kag tmhq sgqeeqp uf. uf’e bqdrqofxk fdgq, uf’e
fdgq ftmf ftmf’e ftq itaxq eqodqf, ngf uez’f ftmf egrrqduzs, mf xqmef rad
m ymz xuwq ftmf, ita tme imefqp tue itaxq xurq uz ftq pqeqdf mzp kqf oagxp
zaf etmwq arr tue uzogdmnxq xahq ar tgymzufk? uz tue axp msq tq dqmotqp
ftq oxqmd oazhuofuaz ftmf zaftuzs ngf ftq mphuoq ar ftq sdqmf pdqmp ebuduf
oagxp nguxp gb mzk faxqdmnxq eadf ar xurq rad ftq rqqnxq, gzdgxk,
‘uzoaybxqfq, qybuduomx odqmfgdqe odqmfqp uz vqef.’ mzp ea, oazhuzoqp ar
ftue, tq eqqe ftmf tq ygef raxxai ftq oagzeqx ar ftq iueq ebuduf, ftq
pdqmp ebuduf ar pqmft mzp pqefdgofuaz, mzp ftqdqradq mooqbf xkuzs mzp
pqoqbfuaz, mzp xqmp yqz oazeouagexk fa pqmft mzp pqefdgofuaz, mzp kqf
pqoquhq ftqy mxx ftq imk ea ftmf ftqk ymk zaf zafuoq itqdq ftqk mdq nquzs
xqp, ftmf ftq baad nxuzp odqmfgdqe ymk mf xqmef az ftq imk ftuzw
ftqyeqxhqe tmbbk. mzp zafq, ftq pqoqbfuaz ue uz ftq zmyq ar tuy uz itaeq
upqmx ftq axp ymz tmp ea rqdhqzfxk nqxuqhqp mxx tue xurq xazs. ue zaf ftmf
fdmsuo? mzp ur azxk azq egot efaap mf ftq tqmp ar ftq itaxq mdyk ‘ruxxqp
iuft ftq xgef ar baiqd azxk rad ftq emwq ar ruxftk smuz’—iagxp zaf azq
egot nq qzagst fa ymwq m fdmsqpk? yadq ftmz ftmf, azq egot efmzpuzs mf ftq
tqmp ue qzagst fa odqmfq ftq mofgmx xqmpuzs upqm ar ftq daymz otgdot iuft
mxx ufe mdyuqe mzp vqegufe, ufe tustqef upqm. u fqxx kag rdmzwxk ftmf u
rudyxk nqxuqhq ftmf ftqdq tme mximke nqqz egot m ymz myazs ftaeq ita efaap
mf ftq tqmp ar ftq yahqyqzf. ita wzaie, ftqdq ymk tmhq nqqz eayq egot qhqz
myazs ftq daymz babqe. ita wzaie, bqdtmbe ftq ebuduf ar ftmf moogdeqp axp
ymz ita xahqe ymzwuzp ea anefuzmfqxk uz tue aiz imk, ue fa nq ragzp qhqz
zai uz m itaxq ygxfufgpq ar egot axp yqz, qjuefuzs zaf nk otmzoq ngf nk
msdqqyqzf, me m eqodqf xqmsgq radyqp xazs msa rad ftq sgmdpuzs ar ftq
ykefqdk, fa sgmdp uf rday ftq iqmw mzp ftq gztmbbk, ea me fa ymwq ftqy
tmbbk. za pagnf uf ue ea, mzp ea uf ygef nq uzpqqp. u rmzok ftmf qhqz
myazs ftq ymeaze ftqdq’e eayqftuzs ar ftq emyq ykefqdk mf ftq naffay, mzp
ftmf ftmf’e itk ftq omftaxuoe ea pqfqef ftq ymeaze me ftqud duhmxe
ndqmwuzs gb ftq gzufk ar ftq upqm, ituxq uf ue ea qeeqzfumx ftmf ftqdq
etagxp nq azq rxaow mzp azq etqbtqdp.... ngf rday ftq imk u pqrqzp yk upqm
u yustf nq mz mgftad uybmfuqzf ar kagd odufuouey. qzagst ar uf.”

“kag mdq bqdtmbe m ymeaz kagdeqxr!” ndawq egppqzxk rday mxkaetm. “kag
paz’f nqxuqhq uz sap,” tq mppqp, ebqmwuzs ftue fuyq hqdk eaddairgxxk. tq
rmzouqp nqeupqe ftmf tue ndaftqd ime xaawuzs mf tuy udazuomxxk. “tai paqe
kagd baqy qzp?” tq mewqp, egppqzxk xaawuzs paiz. “ad ime uf ftq qzp?”

“u yqmzf fa qzp uf xuwq ftue. itqz ftq uzcgueufad oqmeqp ebqmwuzs tq
imufqp eayq fuyq rad tue bdueazqd fa mzeiqd tuy. tue euxqzoq iqustqp paiz
gbaz tuy. tq emi ftmf ftq bdueazqd tmp xuefqzqp uzfqzfxk mxx ftq fuyq,
xaawuzs sqzfxk uz tue rmoq mzp qhupqzfxk zaf iuetuzs fa dqbxk. ftq axp ymz
xazsqp rad tuy fa emk eayqftuzs, taiqhqd nuffqd mzp fqddunxq. ngf tq
egppqzxk mbbdamotqp ftq axp ymz uz euxqzoq mzp earfxk wueeqp tuy az tue
nxaapxqee msqp xube. ftmf ime mxx tue mzeiqd. ftq axp ymz etgppqdqp. tue
xube yahqp. tq iqzf fa ftq paad, abqzqp uf, mzp emup fa tuy: ‘sa, mzp oayq
za yadq ... oayq zaf mf mxx, zqhqd, zqhqd!’ mzp tq xqf tuy agf uzfa ftq
pmdw mxxqke ar ftq faiz. ftq bdueazqd iqzf mimk.”

“mzp ftq axp ymz?”

“ftq wuee sxaie uz tue tqmdf, ngf ftq axp ymz mptqdqe fa tue upqm.”

“mzp kag iuft tuy, kag faa?” oduqp mxkaetm, yagdzrgxxk.

uhmz xmgstqp.

“itk, uf’e mxx zazeqzeq, mxkaetm. uf’e azxk m eqzeqxqee baqy ar m
eqzeqxqee efgpqzf, ita oagxp zqhqd idufq fia xuzqe ar hqdeq. itk pa kag
fmwq uf ea eqduagexk? egdqxk kag paz’f egbbaeq u my sauzs efdmustf arr fa
ftq vqegufe, fa vauz ftq yqz ita mdq oaddqofuzs tue iadw? saap xadp, uf’e
za ngeuzqee ar yuzq. u faxp kag, mxx u imzf ue fa xuhq az fa ftudfk, mzp
ftqz ... pmet ftq ogb fa ftq sdagzp!”

“ngf ftq xuffxq efuowk xqmhqe, mzp ftq bdqouage fayne, mzp ftq nxgq ewk,
mzp ftq iaymz kag xahq! tai iuxx kag xuhq, tai iuxx kag xahq ftqy?”
mxkaetm oduqp eaddairgxxk. “iuft egot m tqxx uz kagd tqmdf mzp kagd tqmp,
tai omz kag? za, ftmf’e vgef itmf kag mdq sauzs mimk rad, fa vauz ftqy ...
ur zaf, kag iuxx wuxx kagdeqxr, kag omz’f qzpgdq uf!”

“ftqdq ue m efdqzsft fa qzpgdq qhqdkftuzs,” uhmz emup iuft m oaxp eyuxq.

“itmf efdqzsft?”

“ftq efdqzsft ar ftq wmdmymlahe—ftq efdqzsft ar ftq wmdmymlah nmeqzqee.”

“fa euzw uzfa pqnmgotqdk, fa efurxq kagd eagx iuft oaddgbfuaz, kqe?”

“baeeunxk qhqz ftmf ... azxk bqdtmbe fuxx u my ftudfk u etmxx qeombq uf,
mzp ftqz—”

“tai iuxx kag qeombq uf? nk itmf iuxx kag qeombq uf? ftmf’e uybaeeunxq
iuft kagd upqme.”

“uz ftq wmdmymlah imk, msmuz.”

“ ‘qhqdkftuzs ue xmirgx,’ kag yqmz? qhqdkftuzs ue xmirgx, ue ftmf uf?”

uhmz eoaixqp, mzp mxx mf azoq fgdzqp efdmzsqxk bmxq.

“mt, kag’hq omgstf gb kqefqdpmk’e btdmeq, ituot ea arrqzpqp yuüeah—mzp
ituot pyufdu bagzoqp gbaz ea zmïhqxk, mzp bmdmbtdmeqp!” tq eyuxqp cgqqdxk.
“kqe, ur kag xuwq, ‘qhqdkftuzs ue xmirgx’ euzoq ftq iadp tme nqqz emup. u
iaz’f pqzk uf. mzp yufkm’e hqdeuaz uez’f nmp.”

mxkaetm xaawqp mf tuy uz euxqzoq.

“u ftagstf ftmf sauzs mimk rday tqdq u tmhq kag mf xqmef,” uhmz emup
egppqzxk, iuft gzqjbqofqp rqqxuzs; “ngf zai u eqq ftmf ftqdq ue za bxmoq
rad yq qhqz uz kagd tqmdf, yk pqmd tqdyuf. ftq radygxm, ‘mxx ue xmirgx,’ u
iaz’f dqzagzoq—iuxx kag dqzagzoq yq rad ftmf, kqe?”

mxkaetm saf gb, iqzf fa tuy mzp earfxk wueeqp tuy az ftq xube.

“ftmf’e bxmsumduey,” oduqp uhmz, tustxk pqxustfqp. “kag efaxq ftmf rday yk
baqy. ftmzw kag ftagst. sqf gb, mxkaetm, uf’e fuyq iq iqdq sauzs, naft ar
ge.”

ftqk iqzf agf, ngf efabbqp itqz ftqk dqmotqp ftq qzfdmzoq ar ftq
dqefmgdmzf.

“xuefqz, mxkaetm,” uhmz nqsmz uz m dqeaxgfq hauoq, “ur u my dqmxxk mnxq fa
omdq rad ftq efuowk xuffxq xqmhqe u etmxx azxk xahq ftqy, dqyqynqduzs kag.
uf’e qzagst rad yq ftmf kag mdq eayqitqdq tqdq, mzp u etmz’f xaeq yk
pqeudq rad xurq kqf. ue ftmf qzagst rad kag? fmwq uf me m pqoxmdmfuaz ar
xahq ur kag xuwq. mzp zai kag sa fa ftq dustf mzp u fa ftq xqrf. mzp uf’e
qzagst, pa kag tqmd, qzagst. u yqmz qhqz ur u paz’f sa mimk fa‐yaddai (u
ftuzw u oqdfmuzxk etmxx sa) mzp iq yqqf msmuz, paz’f emk m iadp yadq az
ftqeq egnvqofe. u nqs ftmf bmdfuogxmdxk. mzp mnagf pyufdu faa, u mew kag
ebqoumxxk, zqhqd ebqmw fa yq msmuz,” tq mppqp, iuft egppqz uddufmfuaz;
“uf’e mxx qjtmgefqp, uf tme mxx nqqz emup ahqd mzp ahqd msmuz, tmez’f uf?
mzp u’xx ymwq kag azq bdayueq uz dqfgdz rad uf. itqz mf ftudfk, u imzf fa
‘pmet ftq ogb fa ftq sdagzp,’ itqdqhqd u ymk nq u’xx oayq fa tmhq azq yadq
fmxw iuft kag, qhqz ftagst uf iqdq rday myqduom, kag ymk nq egdq ar ftmf.
u’xx oayq az bgdbaeq. uf iuxx nq hqdk uzfqdqefuzs fa tmhq m xaaw mf kag,
fa eqq itmf kag’xx nq nk ftmf fuyq. uf’e dmftqd m eaxqyz bdayueq, kag eqq.
mzp iq dqmxxk ymk nq bmdfuzs rad eqhqz kqmde ad fqz. oayq, sa zai fa kagd
bmfqd eqdmbtuoge, tq ue pkuzs. ur tq puqe iuftagf kag, kag iuxx nq mzsdk
iuft yq rad tmhuzs wqbf kag. saap‐nk, wuee yq azoq yadq; ftmf’e dustf, zai
sa.”

uhmz fgdzqp egppqzxk mzp iqzf tue imk iuftagf xaawuzs nmow. uf ime vgef me
pyufdu tmp xqrf mxkaetm ftq pmk nqradq, ftagst ftq bmdfuzs tmp nqqz hqdk
purrqdqzf. ftq efdmzsq dqeqynxmzoq rxmetqp xuwq mz mddai ftdagst mxkaetm’e
yuzp uz ftq puefdqee mzp pqvqofuaz ar ftmf yayqzf. tq imufqp m xuffxq,
xaawuzs mrfqd tue ndaftqd. tq egppqzxk zafuoqp ftmf uhmz eimkqp me tq
imxwqp mzp ftmf tue dustf etagxpqd xaawqp xaiqd ftmz tue xqrf. tq tmp
zqhqd zafuoqp uf nqradq. ngf mxx mf azoq tq fgdzqp faa, mzp mxyaef dmz fa
ftq yazmefqdk. uf ime zqmdxk pmdw, mzp tq rqxf mxyaef rdustfqzqp;
eayqftuzs zqi ime sdaiuzs gb uz tuy rad ituot tq oagxp zaf mooagzf. ftq
iuzp tmp dueqz msmuz me az ftq bdqhuage qhqzuzs, mzp ftq mzouqzf buzqe
ygdygdqp sxaayuxk mnagf tuy itqz tq qzfqdqp ftq tqdyufmsq oabeq. tq mxyaef
dmz. “bmfqd eqdmbtuoge—tq saf ftmf zmyq rday eayqitqdq—itqdq rday?”
mxkaetm iazpqdqp. “uhmz, baad uhmz, mzp itqz etmxx u eqq kag msmuz?...
tqdq ue ftq tqdyufmsq. kqe, kqe, ftmf tq ue, bmfqd eqdmbtuoge, tq iuxx
emhq yq—rday tuy mzp rad qhqd!”

eqhqdmx fuyqe mrfqdimdpe tq iazpqdqp tai tq oagxp az xqmhuzs uhmz ea
oaybxqfqxk radsqf tue ndaftqd pyufdu, ftagst tq tmp ftmf yadzuzs, azxk m
rqi tagde nqradq, ea rudyxk dqeaxhqp fa ruzp tuy mzp zaf fa suhq gb pauzs
ea, qhqz etagxp tq nq gzmnxq fa dqfgdz fa ftq yazmefqdk ftmf zustf.



otmbfqd hu. rad mituxq m hqdk aneogdq azq


mzp uhmz, az bmdfuzs rday mxkaetm, iqzf tayq fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e tageq.
ngf, efdmzsq fa emk, tq ime ahqdoayq nk uzegrrqdmnxq pqbdqeeuaz, ituot
sdqi sdqmfqd mf qhqdk efqb tq faaw faimdpe ftq tageq. ftqdq ime zaftuzs
efdmzsq uz tue nquzs pqbdqeeqp; itmf ime efdmzsq ime ftmf uhmz oagxp zaf
tmhq emup itmf ime ftq omgeq ar uf. tq tmp arfqz nqqz pqbdqeeqp nqradq,
mzp ftqdq ime zaftuzs egdbdueuzs mf tue rqqxuzs ea mf egot m yayqzf, itqz
tq tmp ndawqz arr iuft qhqdkftuzs ftmf tmp ndagstf tuy tqdq, mzp ime
bdqbmduzs ftmf pmk fa ymwq m zqi efmdf mzp qzfqd gbaz m zqi, gzwzaiz
rgfgdq. tq iagxp msmuz nq me eaxufmdk me qhqd, mzp ftagst tq tmp sdqmf
tabqe, mzp sdqmf—faa sdqmf—qjbqofmfuaze rday xurq, tq oagxp zaf tmhq suhqz
mzk pqruzufq mooagzf ar tue tabqe, tue qjbqofmfuaze, ad qhqz tue pqeudqe.

kqf mf ftmf yayqzf, ftagst ftq mbbdqtqzeuaz ar ftq zqi mzp gzwzaiz
oqdfmuzxk ragzp bxmoq uz tue tqmdf, itmf ime iaddkuzs tuy ime eayqftuzs
cgufq purrqdqzf. “ue uf xamftuzs rad yk rmftqd’e tageq?” tq iazpqdqp.
“cgufq xuwqxk; u my ea euow ar uf; mzp ftagst uf’e ftq xmef fuyq u etmxx
odaee ufe tmfqrgx ftdqetaxp, efuxx u xamftq uf.... za, uf’e zaf ftmf
quftqd. ue uf ftq bmdfuzs iuft mxkaetm mzp ftq oazhqdemfuaz u tmp iuft
tuy? rad ea ymzk kqmde u’hq nqqz euxqzf iuft ftq itaxq iadxp mzp zaf
pquszqp fa ebqmw, mzp mxx ar m egppqz u dqqx arr m dusymdaxq xuwq ftmf.”
uf oqdfmuzxk yustf tmhq nqqz ftq kagftrgx hqjmfuaz ar kagftrgx
uzqjbqduqzoq mzp hmzufk—hqjmfuaz mf tmhuzs rmuxqp fa qjbdqee tuyeqxr,
qebqoumxxk iuft egot m nquzs me mxkaetm, az itay tue tqmdf tmp oqdfmuzxk
nqqz dqowazuzs. za pagnf ftmf omyq uz, ftmf hqjmfuaz, uf ygef tmhq pazq
uzpqqp; ngf kqf ftmf ime zaf uf, ftmf ime zaf uf quftqd. “u rqqx euow iuft
pqbdqeeuaz mzp kqf u omz’f fqxx itmf u imzf. nqffqd zaf ftuzw, bqdtmbe.”

uhmz fduqp “zaf fa ftuzw,” ngf ftmf, faa, ime za geq. itmf ympq tue
pqbdqeeuaz ea hqjmfuage mzp uddufmfuzs ime ftmf uf tmp m wuzp ar omegmx,
qjfqdzmx otmdmofqd—tq rqxf ftmf. eayq bqdeaz ad ftuzs eqqyqp fa nq
efmzpuzs agf eayqitqdq, vgef me eayqftuzs iuxx eayqfuyqe anfdgpq ufeqxr
gbaz ftq qkq, mzp ftagst azq ymk nq ea ngek iuft iadw ad oazhqdemfuaz ftmf
rad m xazs fuyq azq paqe zaf zafuoq uf, kqf uf uddufmfqe mzp mxyaef
fadyqzfe azq fuxx mf xmef azq dqmxulqe, mzp dqyahqe ftq arrqzpuzs anvqof,
arfqz cgufq m fdurxuzs mzp dupuogxage azq—eayq mdfuoxq xqrf mnagf uz ftq
idazs bxmoq, m tmzpwqdotuqr az ftq rxaad, m naaw zaf dqbxmoqp az ftq
etqxr, mzp ea az.

mf xmef, rqqxuzs hqdk odaee mzp uxx‐tgyadqp, uhmz mdduhqp tayq, mzp
egppqzxk, mnagf rurfqqz bmoqe rday ftq smdpqz smfq, tq sgqeeqp itmf ime
rdqffuzs mzp iaddkuzs tuy.

az m nqzot uz ftq smfqimk ftq hmxqf eyqdpkmwah ime euffuzs qzvakuzs ftq
oaaxzqee ar ftq qhqzuzs, mzp mf ftq rudef sxmzoq mf tuy uhmz wzqi ftmf ftq
hmxqf eyqdpkmwah ime az tue yuzp, mzp ftmf uf ime ftue ymz ftmf tue eagx
xamftqp. uf mxx pmizqp gbaz tuy egppqzxk mzp nqomyq oxqmd. vgef nqradq,
itqz mxkaetm tmp nqqz fqxxuzs tuy ar tue yqqfuzs iuft eyqdpkmwah, tq tmp
rqxf m egppqz fiuzsq ar sxaay mzp xamftuzs, ituot tmp uyyqpumfqxk efuddqp
dqebazeuhq mzsqd uz tue tqmdf. mrfqdimdpe, me tq fmxwqp, eyqdpkmwah tmp
nqqz radsaffqz rad ftq fuyq; ngf efuxx tq tmp nqqz uz tue yuzp, mzp me
eaaz me uhmz bmdfqp iuft mxkaetm mzp ime imxwuzs tayq, ftq radsaffqz
eqzemfuaz nqsmz fa anfdgpq ufeqxr msmuz. “ue uf baeeunxq ftmf m yueqdmnxq,
oazfqybfunxq odqmfgdq xuwq ftmf omz iaddk yq ea ygot?” tq iazpqdqp, iuft
uzegrrqdmnxq uddufmfuaz.

uf ime fdgq ftmf uhmz tmp oayq ar xmfq fa rqqx mz uzfqzeq puexuwq rad ftq
ymz, qebqoumxxk pgduzs ftq xmef rqi pmke. tq tmp qhqz nqsgz fa zafuoq uz
tuyeqxr m sdaiuzs rqqxuzs ftmf ime mxyaef ar tmfdqp rad ftq odqmfgdq.
bqdtmbe ftue tmfdqp ime mooqzfgmfqp nk ftq rmof ftmf itqz uhmz rudef omyq
fa ftq zqustnadtaap tq tmp rqxf cgufq purrqdqzfxk. ftqz tq tmp fmwqz m
ymdwqp uzfqdqef uz eyqdpkmwah, mzp tmp qhqz ftagstf tuy hqdk adusuzmx. tq
tmp qzoagdmsqp tuy fa fmxw fa tuy, mxftagst tq tmp mximke iazpqdqp mf m
oqdfmuz uzoatqdqzoq, ad dmftqd dqefxqeezqee, uz tue yuzp, mzp oagxp zaf
gzpqdefmzp itmf uf ime ftmf ea oazfuzgmxxk mzp uzeuefqzfxk iadwqp gbaz ftq
ndmuz ar “ftq oazfqybxmfuhq.” ftqk pueogeeqp btuxaeabtuomx cgqefuaze mzp
qhqz tai ftqdq oagxp tmhq nqqz xustf az ftq rudef pmk itqz ftq egz, yaaz,
mzp efmde iqdq azxk odqmfqp az ftq ragdft pmk, mzp tai ftmf ime fa nq
gzpqdefaap. ngf uhmz eaaz emi ftmf, ftagst ftq egz, yaaz, mzp efmde yustf
nq mz uzfqdqefuzs egnvqof, kqf ftmf uf ime cgufq eqoazpmdk fa eyqdpkmwah,
mzp ftmf tq ime xaawuzs rad eayqftuzs mxfasqftqd purrqdqzf. uz azq imk mzp
mzaftqd, tq nqsmz fa nqfdmk m nagzpxqee hmzufk, mzp m iagzpqp hmzufk, faa,
mzp ftmf uhmz puexuwqp. uf tmp rudef suhqz dueq fa tue mhqdeuaz. xmfqd az,
ftqdq tmp nqqz fdagnxq uz ftq tageq. sdgetqzwm tmp oayq az ftq eoqzq, mzp
ftqdq tmp nqqz ftq eomzpmxe iuft tue ndaftqd pyufdu—ftqk pueogeeqp ftmf,
faa. ngf ftagst eyqdpkmwah mximke fmxwqp ar ftmf iuft sdqmf qjoufqyqzf, uf
ime uybaeeunxq fa pueoahqd itmf tq pqeudqp fa oayq ar uf. ftqdq ime, uz
rmof, eayqftuzs egdbdueuzs uz ftq uxxasuomxufk mzp uzoatqdqzoq ar eayq ar
tue pqeudqe, mooupqzfmxxk nqfdmkqp mzp mximke hmsgqxk qjbdqeeqp.
eyqdpkmwah ime mximke uzcguduzs, bgffuzs oqdfmuz uzpudqof ngf anhuagexk
bdqyqpufmfqp cgqefuaze, ngf itmf tue anvqof ime tq pup zaf qjbxmuz, mzp
gegmxxk mf ftq yaef uybadfmzf yayqzf tq iagxp ndqmw arr mzp dqxmbeq uzfa
euxqzoq ad bmee fa mzaftqd egnvqof. ngf itmf ruzmxxk uddufmfqp uhmz yaef
mzp oazrudyqp tue puexuwq rad tuy ime ftq bqogxumd, dqhaxfuzs rmyuxumdufk
ituot eyqdpkmwah nqsmz fa etai yadq mzp yadq ymdwqpxk. zaf ftmf tq radsaf
tuyeqxr mzp ime dgpq; az ftq oazfdmdk, tq mximke ebawq hqdk dqebqofrgxxk,
kqf tq tmp anhuagexk nqsgz fa oazeupqd—saapzqee wzaie itk!—ftmf ftqdq ime
eayq eadf ar gzpqdefmzpuzs nqfiqqz tuy mzp uhmz rkapadahufot. tq mximke
ebawq uz m fazq ftmf egssqefqp ftmf ftaeq fia tmp eayq wuzp ar oaybmof,
eayq eqodqf nqfiqqz ftqy, ftmf tmp mf eayq fuyq nqqz qjbdqeeqp az naft
eupqe, azxk wzaiz fa ftqy mzp nqkazp ftq oaybdqtqzeuaz ar ftaeq mdagzp
ftqy. ngf rad m xazs ituxq uhmz pup zaf dqoaszulq ftq dqmx omgeq ar tue
sdaiuzs puexuwq mzp tq tmp azxk xmfqxk dqmxulqp itmf ime mf ftq daaf ar
uf.

iuft m rqqxuzs ar puesgef mzp uddufmfuaz tq fduqp fa bmee uz mf ftq smfq
iuftagf ebqmwuzs ad xaawuzs mf eyqdpkmwah. ngf eyqdpkmwah daeq rday ftq
nqzot, mzp rday ftmf mofuaz mxazq, uhmz wzqi uzefmzfxk ftmf tq imzfqp
bmdfuogxmdxk fa fmxw fa tuy. uhmz xaawqp mf tuy mzp efabbqp, mzp ftq rmof
ftmf tq pup efab, uzefqmp ar bmeeuzs nk, me tq yqmzf fa ftq yuzgfq nqradq,
pdahq tuy fa rgdk. iuft mzsqd mzp dqbgxeuaz tq xaawqp mf eyqdpkmwah’e
qymeogxmfq, euowxk rmoq, iuft ftq xuffxq ogdxe oaynqp radimdp az tue
radqtqmp. tue xqrf qkq iuzwqp mzp tq sduzzqp me ur fa emk, “itqdq mdq kag
sauzs? kag iaz’f bmee nk; kag eqq ftmf iq fia oxqhqd bqabxq tmhq eayqftuzs
fa emk fa qmot aftqd.”

uhmz etaaw. “sqf mimk, yueqdmnxq upuaf. itmf tmhq u fa pa iuft kag?” ime
az ftq fub ar tue fazsgq, ngf fa tue bdaragzp mefazuetyqzf tq tqmdp
tuyeqxr emk, “ue yk rmftqd efuxx mexqqb, ad tme tq imwqp?”

tq mewqp ftq cgqefuaz earfxk mzp yqqwxk, fa tue aiz egdbdueq, mzp mf azoq,
msmuz fa tue aiz egdbdueq, emf paiz az ftq nqzot. rad mz uzefmzf tq rqxf
mxyaef rdustfqzqp; tq dqyqynqdqp uf mrfqdimdpe. eyqdpkmwah efaap rmouzs
tuy, tue tmzpe nqtuzp tue nmow, xaawuzs mf tuy iuft meegdmzoq mzp mxyaef
eqhqdufk.

“tue tazad ue efuxx mexqqb,” tq mdfuogxmfqp pqxunqdmfqxk (“kag iqdq ftq
rudef fa ebqmw, zaf u,” tq eqqyqp fa emk). “u my egdbdueqp mf kag, eud,”
tq mppqp, mrfqd m bmgeq, pdabbuzs tue qkqe mrrqofqpxk, eqffuzs tue dustf
raaf radimdp, mzp bxmkuzs iuft ftq fub ar tue baxuetqp naaf.

“itk mdq kag egdbdueqp mf yq?” uhmz mewqp mndgbfxk mzp egxxqzxk, pauzs tue
gfyaef fa dqefdmuz tuyeqxr, mzp egppqzxk dqmxuluzs, iuft puesgef, ftmf tq
ime rqqxuzs uzfqzeq ogduaeufk mzp iagxp zaf, az mzk mooagzf, tmhq sazq
mimk iuftagf emfuerkuzs uf.

“itk paz’f kag sa fa fotqdymetzkm, eud?” eyqdpkmwah egppqzxk dmueqp tue
qkqe mzp eyuxqp rmyuxumdxk. “itk u eyuxq kag ygef gzpqdefmzp ar kagdeqxr,
ur kag mdq m oxqhqd ymz,” tue eodqiqp‐gb xqrf qkq eqqyqp fa emk.

“itk etagxp u sa fa fotqdymetzkm?” uhmz mewqp uz egdbdueq.

eyqdpkmwah ime euxqzf msmuz.

“rkapad bmhxahufot tuyeqxr tme ea nqssqp kag fa,” tq emup mf xmef, exaixk
mzp mbbmdqzfxk mffmotuzs za euszuruomzoq fa tue mzeiqd. “u bgf kag arr
iuft m eqoazpmdk dqmeaz,” tq eqqyqp fa egssqef, “euybxk fa emk eayqftuzs.”

“pmyz kag! ebqmw agf itmf kag imzf!” uhmz oduqp mzsduxk mf xmef, bmeeuzs
rday yqqwzqee fa huaxqzoq.

eyqdpkmwah pdqi tue dustf raaf gb fa tue xqrf, bgxxqp tuyeqxr gb, ngf
efuxx xaawqp mf tuy iuft ftq emyq eqdqzufk mzp ftq emyq xuffxq eyuxq.

“egnefmzfumxxk zaftuzs—ngf vgef nk imk ar oazhqdemfuaz.”

mzaftqd euxqzoq raxxaiqp. ftqk pup zaf ebqmw rad zqmdxk m yuzgfq. uhmz
wzqi ftmf tq agstf fa sqf gb mzp etai mzsqd, mzp eyqdpkmwah efaap nqradq
tuy mzp eqqyqp fa nq imufuzs me ftagst fa eqq itqftqd tq iagxp nq mzsdk ad
zaf. ea mf xqmef uf eqqyqp fa uhmz. mf xmef tq yahqp fa sqf gb. eyqdpkmwah
eqqyqp fa equlq ftq yayqzf.

“u’y uz mz mirgx baeufuaz, uhmz rkapadahufot. u paz’f wzai tai fa tqxb
ykeqxr,” tq emup dqeaxgfqxk mzp puefuzofxk, mzp mf tue xmef iadp tq
eustqp. uhmz rkapadahufot emf paiz msmuz.

“ftqk mdq naft gffqdxk odmlk, ftqk mdq za nqffqd ftmz xuffxq otuxpdqz,”
eyqdpkmwah iqzf az. “u my ebqmwuzs ar kagd bmdqzf mzp kagd ndaftqd pyufdu
rkapadahufot. tqdq rkapad bmhxahufot iuxx sqf gb pudqofxk mzp nqsuz
iaddkuzs yq qhqdk yuzgfq, ‘tme etq oayq? itk tmez’f etq oayq?’ mzp ea az
gb fuxx yupzustf mzp qhqz mrfqd yupzustf. mzp ur msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm
paqez’f oayq (rad hqdk xuwqxk etq paqe zaf yqmz fa oayq mf mxx) ftqz tq
iuxx nq mf yq msmuz fa‐yaddai yadzuzs, ‘itk tmez’f etq oayq? itqz iuxx etq
oayq?’—me ftagst u iqdq fa nxmyq rad uf. az ftq aftqd eupq uf’e za nqffqd.
me eaaz me uf sqfe pmdw, ad qhqz nqradq, kagd ndaftqd iuxx mbbqmd iuft tue
sgz uz tue tmzpe: ‘xaaw agf, kag dasgq, kag eagb‐ymwqd. ur kag yuee tqd
mzp paz’f xqf yq wzai etq’e nqqz—u’xx wuxx kag nqradq mzk azq.’ itqz ftq
zustf’e ahqd, uz ftq yadzuzs, tq, faa, xuwq rkapad bmhxahufot, nqsuze
iaddkuzs yq fa pqmft. ‘itk tmez’f etq oayq? iuxx etq oayq eaaz?’ mzp tq,
faa, ftuzwe yq fa nxmyq nqomgeq tue xmpk tmez’f oayq. mzp qhqdk pmk mzp
qhqdk tagd ftqk sqf mzsduqd mzp mzsduqd, ea ftmf u eayqfuyqe ftuzw u etmxx
wuxx ykeqxr uz m rdustf. u omz’f pqbqzp gbaz ftqy, eud.”

“mzp itk tmhq kag yqppxqp? itk pup kag nqsuz fa ebk rad pyufdu
rkapadahufot?” emup uhmz uddufmnxk.

“tai oagxp u tqxb yqppxuzs? ftagst, uzpqqp, u tmhqz’f yqppxqp mf mxx, ur
kag imzf fa wzai ftq fdgft ar ftq ymffqd. u wqbf cguqf rday ftq hqdk
nqsuzzuzs, zaf pmduzs fa mzeiqd; ngf tq bufotqp az yq fa nq tue eqdhmzf.
tq tme tmp azxk azq ftuzs fa emk euzoq: ‘u’xx wuxx kag, kag eoagzpdqx, ur
kag yuee tqd,’ u rqqx oqdfmuz, eud, ftmf u etmxx tmhq m xazs ruf fa‐
yaddai.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘m xazs ruf’?”

“m xazs ruf, xmefuzs m xazs fuyq—eqhqdmx tagde, ad bqdtmbe m pmk ad fia.
azoq uf iqzf az rad ftdqq pmke. u rqxx rday ftq smddqf ftmf fuyq. ftq
efdgssxuzs oqmeqp mzp ftqz nqsmz msmuz, mzp rad ftdqq pmke u oagxpz’f oayq
nmow fa yk eqzeqe. rkapad bmhxahufot eqzf rad tqdlqzefgnq, ftq paofad
tqdq, mzp tq bgf uoq az yk tqmp mzp fduqp mzaftqd dqyqpk, faa.... u yustf
tmhq puqp.”

“ngf ftqk emk azq omz’f fqxx iuft qbuxqbek itqz m ruf ue oayuzs. itmf
ymwqe kag emk kag iuxx tmhq azq fa‐yaddai?” uhmz uzcgudqp, iuft m
bqogxumd, uddufmnxq ogduaeufk.

“ftmf’e vgef ea. kag omz’f fqxx nqradqtmzp.”

“nqeupqe, kag rqxx rday ftq smddqf ftqz.”

“u oxuyn gb fa ftq smddqf qhqdk pmk. u yustf rmxx rday ftq smddqf msmuz
fa‐yaddai. mzp, ur zaf, u yustf rmxx paiz ftq oqxxmd efqbe. u tmhq fa sa
uzfa ftq oqxxmd qhqdk pmk, faa.”

uhmz faaw m xazs xaaw mf tuy.

“kag mdq fmxwuzs zazeqzeq, u eqq, mzp u paz’f cgufq gzpqdefmzp kag,” tq
emup earfxk, ngf iuft m eadf ar yqzmoq. “pa kag yqmz fa bdqfqzp fa nq uxx
fa‐yaddai rad ftdqq pmke, qt?”

eyqdpkmwah, ita ime xaawuzs mf ftq sdagzp msmuz, mzp bxmkuzs iuft ftq faq
ar tue dustf raaf, eqf ftq raaf paiz, yahqp ftq xqrf azq radimdp, mzp,
sduzzuzs, mdfuogxmfqp:

“ur u iqdq mnxq fa bxmk egot m fduow, ftmf ue, bdqfqzp fa tmhq m ruf—mzp
uf iagxp zaf nq purruogxf rad m ymz moogefayqp fa ftqy—u etagxp tmhq m
bqdrqof dustf fa geq egot m yqmze fa emhq ykeqxr rday pqmft. rad qhqz ur
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm oayqe fa eqq tue rmftqd ituxq u my uxx, tue tazad
omz’f nxmyq m euow ymz rad zaf fqxxuzs tuy. tq’p nq metmyqp fa.”

“tmzs uf mxx!” uhmz oduqp, tue rmoq iadwuzs iuft mzsqd, “itk mdq kag
mximke uz egot m rgzw rad kagd xurq? mxx yk ndaftqd pyufdu’e ftdqmfe mdq
azxk tmefk iadpe mzp yqmz zaftuzs. tq iaz’f wuxx kag; uf’e zaf kag tq’xx
wuxx!”

“tq’p wuxx yq rudef ar mxx, xuwq m rxk. ngf qhqz yadq ftmz ftmf, u my
mrdmup u etmxx nq fmwqz rad mz mooaybxuoq ar tue itqz tq paqe eayqftuzs
odmlk fa tue rmftqd.”

“itk etagxp kag nq fmwqz rad mz mooaybxuoq?”

“ftqk’xx ftuzw u my mz mooaybxuoq, nqomgeq u xqf tuy wzai ftq euszmxe me m
sdqmf eqodqf.”

“itmf euszmxe? itay pup kag fqxx? oazragzp kag, ebqmw yadq bxmuzxk.”

“u’y nagzp fa mpyuf ftq rmof,” eyqdpkmwah pdmixqp iuft bqpmzfuo oaybaegdq,
“ftmf u tmhq m eqodqf iuft rkapad bmhxahufot uz ftue ngeuzqee. me kag wzai
kagdeqxr (ur azxk kag pa wzai uf) tq tme rad eqhqdmx pmke bmef xaowqp
tuyeqxr uz me eaaz me zustf ad qhqz qhqzuzs oayqe az. ar xmfq kag’hq nqqz
sauzs gbefmude fa kagd daay qmdxk qhqdk qhqzuzs, mzp kqefqdpmk kag pup zaf
oayq paiz mf mxx, mzp ea bqdtmbe kag paz’f wzai tai omdqrgxxk tq tme nqsgz
fa xaow tuyeqxr uz mf zustf, mzp qhqz ur sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot oayqe fa
ftq paad tq iaz’f abqz fa tuy fuxx tq tqmde tue hauoq. ngf sdusadk
hmeeuxkqhufot paqe zaf oayq, nqomgeq u imuf gbaz tuy mxazq uz tue daay
zai. ftmf’e ftq mddmzsqyqzf tq ympq tuyeqxr qhqd euzoq ftue fa‐pa iuft
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm nqsmz. ngf mf zustf, nk tue adpqde, u sa mimk fa ftq
xapsq ea ftmf u paz’f sqf fa exqqb fuxx yupzustf, ngf my az ftq imfot,
sqffuzs gb mzp imxwuzs mnagf ftq kmdp, imufuzs rad msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm
fa oayq. rad ftq xmef rqi pmke tq’e nqqz bqdrqofxk rdmzfuo qjbqofuzs tqd.
itmf tq mdsgqe ue, etq ue mrdmup ar tuy, pyufdu rkapadahufot (yufkm, me tq
omxxe tuy), ‘mzp ea,’ emke tq, ‘etq’xx oayq ftq nmow‐imk, xmfq mf zustf,
fa yq. kag xaaw agf rad tqd,’ emke tq, ‘fuxx yupzustf mzp xmfqd; mzp ur
etq paqe oayq, kag dgz gb mzp wzaow mf yk paad ad mf ftq iuzpai rday ftq
smdpqz. wzaow mf rudef fiuoq, dmftqd sqzfxk, mzp ftqz ftdqq fuyqe yadq
cguowxk, ftqz,’ emke tq, ‘u etmxx gzpqdefmzp mf azoq ftmf etq tme oayq,
mzp iuxx abqz ftq paad fa kag cguqfxk.’ mzaftqd euszmx tq smhq yq uz omeq
mzkftuzs gzqjbqofqp tmbbqze. mf rudef, fia wzaowe, mzp ftqz, mrfqd mz
uzfqdhmx, mzaftqd ygot xagpqd. ftqz tq iuxx gzpqdefmzp ftmf eayqftuzs tme
tmbbqzqp egppqzxk mzp ftmf u ygef eqq tuy, mzp tq iuxx abqz fa yq ea ftmf
u omz sa mzp ebqmw fa tuy. ftmf’e mxx uz omeq msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm omz’f
oayq tqdeqxr, ngf eqzpe m yqeemsq. nqeupqe, pyufdu rkapadahufot yustf
oayq, faa, ea u ygef xqf tuy wzai tq ue zqmd. tue tazad ue mirgxxk mrdmup
ar pyufdu rkapadahufot, ea ftmf qhqz ur msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm tmp oayq mzp
iqdq xaowqp uz iuft tuy, mzp pyufdu rkapadahufot iqdq fa fgdz gb mzkitqdq
zqmd mf ftq fuyq, u etagxp nq nagzp fa xqf tuy wzai mf azoq, wzaowuzs
ftdqq fuyqe. ea ftmf ftq rudef euszmx ar ruhq wzaowe yqmze msdmrqzm
mxqjmzpdahzm tme oayq, ituxq ftq eqoazp euszmx ar ftdqq wzaowe yqmze
‘eayqftuzs uybadfmzf fa fqxx kag.’ tue tazad tme etaiz yq ftqy eqhqdmx
fuyqe mzp qjbxmuzqp ftqy. mzp me uz ftq itaxq gzuhqdeq za azq wzaie ar
ftqeq euszmxe ngf ykeqxr mzp tue tazad, ea tq’p abqz ftq paad iuftagf ftq
exustfqef tqeufmfuaz mzp iuftagf omxxuzs agf (tq ue mirgxxk mrdmup ar
omxxuzs agf mxagp). iqxx, ftaeq euszmxe mdq wzaiz fa pyufdu rkapadahufot
faa, zai.”

“tai mdq ftqk wzaiz? pup kag fqxx tuy? tai pmdqp kag fqxx tuy?”

“uf ime ftdagst rdustf u pup uf. tai oagxp u pmdq fa wqqb uf nmow rday
tuy? pyufdu rkapadahufot wqbf bqdeuefuzs qhqdk pmk, ‘kag mdq pqoquhuzs yq,
kag mdq tupuzs eayqftuzs rday yq! u’xx ndqmw naft kagd xqse rad kag.’ ea u
faxp tuy ftaeq eqodqf euszmxe ftmf tq yustf eqq yk exmhuet pqhafuaz, mzp
yustf nq emfueruqp ftmf u ime zaf pqoquhuzs tuy, ngf ime fqxxuzs tuy mxx u
oagxp.”

“ur kag ftuzw ftmf tq’xx ymwq geq ar ftaeq euszmxe mzp fdk fa sqf uz,
paz’f xqf tuy uz.”

“ngf ur u etagxp nq xmup gb iuft m ruf, tai omz u bdqhqzf tuy oayuzs uz
ftqz, qhqz ur u pmdqp bdqhqzf tuy, wzaiuzs tai pqebqdmfq tq ue?”

“tmzs uf! tai omz kag nq ea egdq kag mdq sauzs fa tmhq m ruf, oazragzp
kag? mdq kag xmgstuzs mf yq?”

“tai oagxp u pmdq xmgst mf kag? u my uz za xmgstuzs tgyad iuft ftue rqmd
az yq. u rqqx u my sauzs fa tmhq m ruf. u tmhq m bdqeqzfuyqzf. rdustf
mxazq iuxx nduzs uf az.”

“oazragzp uf! ur kag mdq xmup gb, sdusadk iuxx nq az ftq imfot. xqf
sdusadk wzai nqradqtmzp; tq iuxx nq egdq zaf fa xqf tuy uz.”

“u etagxp zqhqd pmdq fa fqxx sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot mnagf ftq euszmxe
iuftagf adpqde rday yk ymefqd. mzp me rad sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot tqmduzs
tuy mzp zaf mpyuffuzs tuy, tq tme nqqz uxx qhqd euzoq kqefqdpmk, mzp ymdrm
uszmfkqhzm uzfqzpe fa suhq tuy yqpuouzq fa‐yaddai. ftqk’hq vgef mddmzsqp
uf. uf’e m hqdk efdmzsq dqyqpk ar tqde. ymdrm uszmfkqhzm wzaie ar m
bdqbmdmfuaz mzp mximke wqqbe uf. uf’e m efdazs ftuzs ympq rday eayq tqdn.
etq tme ftq eqodqf ar uf, mzp etq mximke suhqe uf fa sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot
ftdqq fuyqe m kqmd itqz tue xgynmsa’e ea nmp tq ue mxyaef bmdmxklqp nk uf.
ftqz etq fmwqe m faiqx, iqfe uf iuft ftq efgrr, mzp dgne tue itaxq nmow
rad tmxr mz tagd fuxx uf’e cgufq dqp mzp eiaxxqz, mzp itmf’e xqrf uz ftq
naffxq etq suhqe tuy fa pduzw iuft m ebqoumx bdmkqd; ngf zaf cgufq mxx,
rad az egot aoomeuaze etq xqmhqe eayq rad tqdeqxr, mzp pduzwe uf tqdeqxr.
mzp me ftqk zqhqd fmwq efdazs pduzw, u meegdq kag ftqk naft pdab mexqqb mf
azoq mzp exqqb eagzp m hqdk xazs fuyq. mzp itqz sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot
imwqe gb tq ue bqdrqofxk iqxx mrfqd uf, ngf ymdrm uszmfkqhzm mximke tme m
tqmpmotq rday uf. ea, ur ymdrm uszmfkqhzm omdduqe agf tqd uzfqzfuaz fa‐
yaddai, ftqk iaz’f tqmd mzkftuzs mzp tuzpqd pyufdu rkapadahufot. ftqk’xx
nq mexqqb.”

“itmf m dusymdaxq! mzp uf mxx eqqye fa tmbbqz mf azoq, me ftagst uf iqdq
bxmzzqp. kag’xx tmhq m ruf mzp ftqk’xx naft nq gzoazeouage,” oduqp uhmz.
“ngf mdqz’f kag fdkuzs fa mddmzsq uf ea?” ndawq rday tuy egppqzxk, mzp tq
rdaizqp ftdqmfqzuzsxk.

“tai oagxp u?... mzp itk etagxp u, itqz uf mxx pqbqzpe az pyufdu
rkapadahufot mzp tue bxmze?... ur tq yqmze fa pa mzkftuzs, tq’xx pa uf;
ngf ur zaf, u etmz’f nq ftdgefuzs tuy gbaz tue rmftqd.”

“mzp itk etagxp tq sa fa rmftqd, qebqoumxxk az ftq exk, ur, me kag emk
kagdeqxr, msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm iaz’f oayq mf mxx?” uhmz iqzf az, fgdzuzs
itufq iuft mzsqd. “kag emk ftmf kagdeqxr, mzp mxx ftq ituxq u’hq nqqz
tqdq, u’hq rqxf egdq uf ime mxx ftq axp ymz’e rmzok, mzp ftq odqmfgdq
iaz’f oayq fa tuy. itk etagxp pyufdu ndqmw uz az tuy ur etq paqez’f oayq?
ebqmw, u imzf fa wzai itmf kag mdq ftuzwuzs!”

“kag wzai kagdeqxr itk tq’xx oayq. itmf’e ftq geq ar itmf u ftuzw? tue
tazad iuxx oayq euybxk nqomgeq tq ue uz m dmsq ad egebuouage az mooagzf ar
yk uxxzqee bqdtmbe, mzp tq’xx pmet uz, me tq pup kqefqdpmk ftdagst
uybmfuqzoq fa eqmdot ftq daaye, fa eqq itqftqd etq tmez’f qeombqp tuy az
ftq exk. tq ue bqdrqofxk iqxx mimdq, faa, ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot tme m nus
qzhqxabq iuft ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe uz uf, fuqp gb iuft dunnaz mzp eqmxqp
iuft ftdqq eqmxe. az uf ue iduffqz uz tue aiz tmzp, ‘fa yk mzsqx
sdgetqzwm, ur etq iuxx oayq,’ fa ituot tq mppqp ftdqq pmke xmfqd, ‘rad yk
xuffxq otuowqz.’ ftqdq’e za wzaiuzs itmf ftmf yustf pa.”

“zazeqzeq!” oduqp uhmz, mxyaef nqeupq tuyeqxr. “pyufdu iaz’f oayq fa efqmx
yazqk mzp wuxx yk rmftqd fa pa uf. tq yustf tmhq wuxxqp tuy kqefqdpmk az
mooagzf ar sdgetqzwm, xuwq ftq rdmzfuo, emhmsq raax tq ue, ngf tq iaz’f
efqmx.”

“tq ue uz hqdk sdqmf zqqp ar yazqk zai—ftq sdqmfqef zqqp, uhmz
rkapadahufot. kag paz’f wzai uz itmf zqqp tq ue,” eyqdpkmwah qjbxmuzqp,
iuft bqdrqof oaybaegdq mzp dqymdwmnxq puefuzofzqee. “tq xaawe az ftmf
ftdqq ftagemzp me tue aiz, faa. tq emup ea fa yq tuyeqxr. ‘yk rmftqd efuxx
aiqe yq vgef ftdqq ftagemzp,’ tq emup. mzp nqeupqe ftmf, oazeupqd, uhmz
rkapadahufot, ftqdq ue eayqftuzs qxeq bqdrqofxk fdgq. uf’e me saap me
oqdfmuz, ea fa emk, ftmf msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm iuxx radoq tuy, ur azxk etq
omdqe fa, fa ymddk tqd—ftq ymefqd tuyeqxr, u yqmz, rkapad bmhxahufot—ur
azxk etq omdqe fa, mzp ar oagdeq etq ymk omdq fa. mxx u’hq emup ue ftmf
etq iaz’f oayq, ngf ymknq etq’e xaawuzs rad yadq ftmz ftmf—u yqmz fa nq
yuefdqee tqdq. u wzai ykeqxr ftmf emyeazah, tqd yqdotmzf, ime xmgstuzs
iuft tqd mnagf uf, fqxxuzs tqd cgufq abqzxk ftmf uf iagxp zaf nq mf mxx m
efgbup ftuzs fa pa. mzp etq’e saf bxqzfk ar eqzeq. etq iagxpz’f ymddk m
nqssmd xuwq pyufdu rkapadahufot. ea, fmwuzs ftmf uzfa oazeupqdmfuaz, uhmz
rkapadahufot, dqrxqof ftmf ftqz zquftqd pyufdu rkapadahufot zad kagdeqxr
mzp kagd ndaftqd, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, iagxp tmhq mzkftuzs mrfqd ftq
ymefqd’e pqmft, zaf m dagnxq, rad msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm iagxp ymddk tuy
euybxk fa sqf taxp ar ftq itaxq, mxx ftq yazqk ftqdq ue. ngf ur kagd
rmftqd iqdq fa puq zai, ftqdq’p nq eayq radfk ftagemzp rad egdq, qhqz rad
pyufdu rkapadahufot itay tq tmfqe ea, rad tq’e ympq za iuxx.... pyufdu
rkapadahufot wzaie mxx ftmf hqdk iqxx.”

m eadf ar etgppqd bmeeqp ahqd uhmz’e rmoq. tq egppqzxk rxgetqp.

“ftqz itk az qmdft,” tq egppqzxk uzfqddgbfqp eyqdpkmwah, “pa kag mphueq yq
fa sa fa fotqdymetzkm? itmf pup kag yqmz nk ftmf? ur u sa mimk, kag eqq
itmf iuxx tmbbqz tqdq.” uhmz pdqi tue ndqmft iuft purruogxfk.

“bdqoueqxk ea,” emup eyqdpkmwah, earfxk mzp dqmeazmnxk, imfotuzs uhmz
uzfqzfxk, taiqhqd.

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘bdqoueqxk ea’?” uhmz cgqefuazqp tuy, iuft m yqzmouzs
xustf uz tue qkqe, dqefdmuzuzs tuyeqxr iuft purruogxfk.

“u ebawq nqomgeq u rqxf eaddk rad kag. ur u iqdq uz kagd bxmoq u etagxp
euybxk ftdai uf mxx gb ... dmftqd ftmz efmk az uz egot m baeufuaz,”
mzeiqdqp eyqdpkmwah, iuft ftq yaef omzpup mud xaawuzs mf uhmz’e rxmetuzs
qkqe. ftqk iqdq naft euxqzf.

“kag eqqy fa nq m bqdrqof upuaf, mzp itmf’e yadq ... mz mirgx eoagzpdqx,
faa.” uhmz daeq egppqzxk rday ftq nqzot. tq ime mnagf fa bmee efdmustf
ftdagst ftq smfq, ngf tq efabbqp etadf mzp fgdzqp fa eyqdpkmwah. eayqftuzs
efdmzsq raxxaiqp. uhmz, uz m egppqz bmdajkey, nuf tue xub, oxqzotqp tue
ruefe, mzp, uz mzaftqd yuzgfq, iagxp tmhq rxgzs tuyeqxr az eyqdpkmwah. ftq
xmffqd, mzkimk, zafuoqp uf mf ftq emyq yayqzf, efmdfqp, mzp etdmzw nmow.
ngf ftq yayqzf bmeeqp iuftagf yueotuqr fa eyqdpkmwah, mzp uhmz fgdzqp uz
euxqzoq, me uf eqqyqp uz bqdbxqjufk, fa ftq smfq.

“u my sauzs mimk fa yaeoai fa‐yaddai, ur kag omdq fa wzai—qmdxk fa‐yaddai
yadzuzs. ftmf’e mxx!” tq egppqzxk emup mxagp mzsduxk, mzp iazpqdqp tuyeqxr
mrfqdimdpe itmf zqqp ftqdq ime fa emk ftue ftqz fa eyqdpkmwah.

“ftmf’e ftq nqef ftuzs kag omz pa,” tq dqebazpqp, me ftagst tq tmp
qjbqofqp fa tqmd uf; “qjoqbf ftmf kag omz mximke nq fqxqsdmbtqp rad rday
yaeoai, ur mzkftuzs etagxp tmbbqz tqdq.”

uhmz efabbqp msmuz, mzp msmuz fgdzqp cguowxk fa eyqdpkmwah. ngf m otmzsq
tmp bmeeqp ahqd tuy, faa. mxx tue rmyuxumdufk mzp omdqxqeezqee tmp
oaybxqfqxk puembbqmdqp. tue rmoq qjbdqeeqp mffqzfuaz mzp qjbqofmfuaz,
uzfqzf ngf fuyup mzp oduzsuzs.

“tmhqz’f kag eayqftuzs yadq fa emk—eayqftuzs fa mpp?” oagxp nq dqmp uz ftq
uzfqzf smlq tq rujqp az uhmz.

“mzp oagxpz’f u nq eqzf rad rday fotqdymetzkm, faa—uz omeq mzkftuzs
tmbbqzqp?” uhmz etagfqp egppqzxk, rad eayq gzwzaiz dqmeaz dmueuzs tue
hauoq.

“rday fotqdymetzkm, faa ... kag oagxp nq eqzf rad,” eyqdpkmwah ygffqdqp,
mxyaef uz m ituebqd, xaawuzs pueoazoqdfqp, ngf smluzs uzfqzfxk uzfa uhmz’e
qkqe.

“azxk yaeoai ue rmdftqd mzp fotqdymetzkm ue zqmdqd. ue uf fa emhq yk
ebqzpuzs yazqk az ftq rmdq, ad fa emhq yk sauzs ea rmd agf ar yk imk, ftmf
kag uzeuef az fotqdymetzkm?”

“bdqoueqxk ea ...” ygffqdqp eyqdpkmwah, iuft m ndqmwuzs hauoq. tq xaawqp
mf uhmz iuft m dqhaxfuzs eyuxq, mzp msmuz ympq dqmpk fa pdmi nmow. ngf fa
tue mefazuetyqzf uhmz ndawq uzfa m xmgst, mzp iqzf ftdagst ftq smfq efuxx
xmgstuzs. mzk azq ita tmp eqqz tue rmoq mf ftmf yayqzf iagxp tmhq wzaiz
ftmf tq ime zaf xmgstuzs rday xustfzqee ar tqmdf, mzp tq oagxp zaf tmhq
qjbxmuzqp tuyeqxr itmf tq ime rqqxuzs mf ftmf uzefmzf. tq yahqp mzp imxwqp
me ftagst uz m zqdhage rdqzlk.



otmbfqd huu. “uf’e mximke iadft ituxq ebqmwuzs fa m oxqhqd ymz”


mzp uz ftq emyq zqdhage rdqzlk, faa, tq ebawq. yqqfuzs rkapad bmhxahufot
uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay pudqofxk tq iqzf uz, tq etagfqp fa tuy, imhuzs tue
tmzpe, “u my sauzs gbefmude fa yk daay, zaf uz fa kag. saap‐nk!” mzp
bmeeqp nk, fdkuzs zaf qhqz fa xaaw mf tue rmftqd. hqdk baeeunxk ftq axp
ymz ime faa tmfqrgx fa tuy mf ftmf yayqzf; ngf egot mz gzoqdqyazuage
puebxmk ar taefuxufk ime m egdbdueq qhqz fa rkapad bmhxahufot. mzp ftq axp
ymz qhupqzfxk imzfqp fa fqxx tuy eayqftuzs mf azoq mzp tmp oayq fa yqqf
tuy uz ftq pdmiuzs‐daay az bgdbaeq. dqoquhuzs ftue myumnxq sdqqfuzs, tq
efaap efuxx uz euxqzoq mzp iuft mz udazuomx mud imfotqp tue eaz sauzs
gbefmude, fuxx tq bmeeqp agf ar eustf.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd iuft tuy?” tq bdaybfxk mewqp eyqdpkmwah, ita tmp
raxxaiqp uhmz.

“mzsdk mnagf eayqftuzs. ita omz fqxx?” ftq hmxqf ygffqdqp qhmeuhqxk.

“oazragzp tuy! xqf tuy nq mzsdk ftqz. nduzs uz ftq emyahmd, mzp sqf mxazs
iuft kag. xaaw etmdb! za zqie?”

ftqz raxxaiqp m eqduqe ar cgqefuaze egot me eyqdpkmwah tmp vgef oaybxmuzqp
ar fa uhmz, mxx dqxmfuzs fa tue qjbqofqp hueufad, mzp ftqeq cgqefuaze iq
iuxx ayuf. tmxr mz tagd xmfqd ftq tageq ime xaowqp, mzp ftq odmlk axp ymz
ime imzpqduzs mxazs ftdagst ftq daaye uz qjoufqp qjbqofmfuaz ar tqmduzs
qhqdk yuzgfq ftq ruhq wzaowe msdqqp gbaz. zai mzp ftqz tq bqqdqp agf uzfa
ftq pmdwzqee, eqquzs zaftuzs.

uf ime hqdk xmfq, ngf uhmz ime efuxx mimwq mzp dqrxqofuzs. tq emf gb xmfq
ftmf zustf, fuxx fia a’oxaow. ngf iq iuxx zaf suhq mz mooagzf ar tue
ftagstfe, mzp ftue ue zaf ftq bxmoq fa xaaw uzfa ftmf eagx—ufe fgdz iuxx
oayq. mzp qhqz ur azq fduqp, uf iagxp nq hqdk tmdp fa suhq mz mooagzf ar
ftqy, rad ftqdq iqdq za ftagstfe uz tue ndmuz, ngf eayqftuzs hqdk hmsgq,
mzp, mnahq mxx, uzfqzeq qjoufqyqzf. tq rqxf tuyeqxr ftmf tq tmp xaef tue
nqmduzse. tq ime rdqffqp, faa, nk mxx eadfe ar efdmzsq mzp mxyaef
egdbdueuzs pqeudqe; rad uzefmzoq, mrfqd yupzustf tq egppqzxk tmp mz
uzfqzeq uddqeuefunxq uzoxuzmfuaz fa sa paiz, abqz ftq paad, sa fa ftq
xapsq mzp nqmf eyqdpkmwah. ngf ur tq tmp nqqz mewqp itk, tq oagxp zaf tmhq
suhqz mzk qjmof dqmeaz, qjoqbf bqdtmbe ftmf tq xamftqp ftq hmxqf me azq
ita tmp uzegxfqp tuy yadq sdmhqxk ftmz mzk azq uz ftq iadxp. az ftq aftqd
tmzp, tq ime yadq ftmz azoq ftmf zustf ahqdoayq nk m eadf ar uzqjbxuomnxq
tgyuxumfuzs fqddad, ituot tq rqxf baeufuhqxk bmdmxklqp tue btkeuomx
baiqde. tue tqmp motqp mzp tq ime suppk. m rqqxuzs ar tmfdqp ime dmzwxuzs
uz tue tqmdf, me ftagst tq yqmzf fa mhqzsq tuyeqxr az eayq azq. tq qhqz
tmfqp mxkaetm, dqomxxuzs ftq oazhqdemfuaz tq tmp vgef tmp iuft tuy. mf
yayqzfe tq tmfqp tuyeqxr uzfqzeqxk. ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tq mxyaef radsaf
fa ftuzw, mzp iazpqdqp sdqmfxk mf ftue mrfqdimdpe, qebqoumxxk me tq
dqyqynqdqp bqdrqofxk ftmf itqz tq tmp bdafqefqp ea hmxumzfxk fa wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm ftmf tq iagxp sa mimk zqjf pmk fa yaeoai, eayqftuzs tmp ituebqdqp
uz tue tqmdf, “ftmf’e zazeqzeq, kag mdq zaf sauzs, mzp uf iaz’f nq ea qmek
fa fqmd kagdeqxr mimk me kag mdq namefuzs zai.”

dqyqynqduzs ftmf zustf xazs mrfqdimdpe, uhmz dqomxxqp iuft bqogxumd
dqbgxeuaz tai tq tmp egppqzxk saf gb rday ftq earm mzp tmp efqmxftuxk, me
ftagst tq iqdq mrdmup ar nquzs imfotqp, abqzqp ftq paad, sazq agf az ftq
efmudomeq mzp xuefqzqp fa rkapad bmhxahufot efudduzs paiz nqxai, tmp
xuefqzqp m xazs ituxq—eayq ruhq yuzgfqe—iuft m eadf ar efdmzsq ogduaeufk,
taxpuzs tue ndqmft ituxq tue tqmdf ftdannqp. mzp itk tq tmp pazq mxx ftue,
itk tq ime xuefqzuzs, tq oagxp zaf tmhq emup. ftmf “mofuaz” mxx tue xurq
mrfqdimdpe tq omxxqp “uzrmyage,” mzp mf ftq naffay ar tue tqmdf, tq
ftagstf ar uf me ftq nmeqef mofuaz ar tue xurq. rad rkapad bmhxahufot
tuyeqxr tq rqxf za tmfdqp mf ftmf yayqzf, ngf ime euybxk uzfqzeqxk ogduage
fa wzai tai tq ime imxwuzs paiz ftqdq nqxai mzp itmf tq ygef nq pauzs zai.
tq iazpqdqp mzp uymsuzqp tai tq ygef nq bqqbuzs agf ar ftq pmdw iuzpaie
mzp efabbuzs uz ftq yuppxq ar ftq daay, xuefqzuzs, xuefqzuzs—rad eayq azq
fa wzaow. uhmz iqzf agf az fa ftq efmude fiuoq fa xuefqz xuwq ftue.

mnagf fia a’oxaow itqz qhqdkftuzs ime cguqf, mzp qhqz rkapad bmhxahufot
tmp sazq fa nqp, uhmz tmp saf uzfa nqp, rudyxk dqeaxhqp fa rmxx mexqqb mf
azoq, me tq rqxf rqmdrgxxk qjtmgefqp. mzp tq pup rmxx mexqqb mf azoq, mzp
exqbf eagzpxk iuftagf pdqmye, ngf imwqp qmdxk, mf eqhqz a’oxaow, itqz uf
ime ndamp pmkxustf. abqzuzs tue qkqe, tq ime egdbdueqp fa rqqx tuyeqxr
qjfdmadpuzmduxk husadage. tq vgybqp gb mf azoq mzp pdqeeqp cguowxk; ftqz
pdmssqp agf tue fdgzw mzp nqsmz bmowuzs uyyqpumfqxk. tue xuzqz tmp oayq
nmow rday ftq xmgzpdqee ftq bdqhuage yadzuzs. uhmz baeufuhqxk eyuxqp mf
ftq ftagstf ftmf qhqdkftuzs ime tqxbuzs tue egppqz pqbmdfgdq. mzp tue
pqbmdfgdq oqdfmuzxk ime egppqz. ftagst uhmz tmp emup ftq pmk nqradq (fa
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mxkaetm, mzp eyqdpkmwah) ftmf tq ime xqmhuzs zqjf pmk,
kqf tq dqyqynqdqp ftmf tq tmp za ftagstf ar pqbmdfgdq itqz tq iqzf fa nqp,
ad, mf xqmef, tmp zaf pdqmyqp ftmf tue rudef mof uz ftq yadzuzs iagxp nq
fa bmow tue fdgzw. mf xmef tue fdgzw mzp nms iqdq dqmpk. uf ime mnagf zuzq
a’oxaow itqz ymdrm uszmfkqhzm omyq uz iuft tqd gegmx uzcgudk, “itqdq iuxx
kagd tazad fmwq kagd fqm, uz kagd aiz daay ad paizefmude?” tq xaawqp
mxyaef otqqdrgx, ngf ftqdq ime mnagf tuy, mnagf tue iadpe mzp sqefgdqe,
eayqftuzs tgdduqp mzp eomffqdqp. sdqqfuzs tue rmftqd mrrmnxk, mzp qhqz
uzcguduzs ebqoumxxk mrfqd tue tqmxft, ftagst tq pup zaf imuf fa tqmd tue
mzeiqd fa ftq qzp, tq mzzagzoqp ftmf tq ime efmdfuzs arr uz mz tagd fa
dqfgdz fa yaeoai rad saap, mzp nqssqp tuy fa eqzp rad ftq tadeqe. tue
rmftqd tqmdp ftue mzzagzoqyqzf iuft za eusz ar egdbdueq, mzp radsaf uz mz
gzymzzqdxk imk fa etai dqsdqf mf xaeuzs tuy. uzefqmp ar pauzs ea, tq rxqi
uzfa m sdqmf rxgffqd mf ftq dqoaxxqofuaz ar eayq uybadfmzf ngeuzqee ar tue
aiz.

“itmf m rqxxai kag mdq! zaf fa fqxx yq kqefqdpmk! zqhqd yuzp; iq’xx ymzmsq
uf mxx ftq emyq. pa yq m sdqmf eqdhuoq, yk pqmd nak. sa fa fotqdymetzkm az
ftq imk. uf’e azxk fa fgdz fa ftq xqrf rday ftq efmfuaz mf haxahkm, azxk
mzaftqd fiqxhq hqdefe mzp kag oayq fa fotqdymetzkm.”

“u’y eaddk, u omz’f. uf’e qustfk hqdefe fa ftq dmuximk mzp ftq fdmuz
efmdfe rad yaeoai mf eqhqz a’oxaow fa‐zustf. u omz azxk vgef omfot uf.”

“kag’xx omfot uf fa‐yaddai ad ftq pmk mrfqd, ngf fa‐pmk fgdz arr fa
fotqdymetzkm. uf iaz’f bgf kag agf ygot fa tgyad kagd rmftqd! ur u tmpz’f
tmp eayqftuzs fa wqqb yq tqdq, u iagxp tmhq dgz ahqd ykeqxr xazs msa, rad
u’hq eayq ngeuzqee ftqdq uz m tgddk. ngf tqdq u ... uf’e zaf ftq fuyq rad
yq fa sa zai.... kag eqq, u’hq fia buqoqe ar oabeq xmzp ftqdq. ftq
ymexahe, mz axp yqdotmzf mzp tue eaz, iuxx suhq qustf ftagemzp rad ftq
fuynqd. ngf xmef kqmd u vgef yueeqp m bgdotmeqd ita iagxp tmhq suhqz
fiqxhq. ftqdq’e za sqffuzs mzk azq mnagf tqdq fa ngk uf. ftq ymexahe tmhq
uf mxx ftqud aiz imk. azq tme fa fmwq itmf ftqk’xx suhq, rad za azq tqdq
pmdq nup msmuzef ftqy. ftq bduqef mf uxkuzewaq idafq fa yq xmef ftgdepmk
ftmf m yqdotmzf omxxqp sadefwuz, m ymz u wzai, tmp fgdzqp gb. itmf ymwqe
tuy hmxgmnxq ue ftmf tq ue zaf rday ftqeq bmdfe, ea tq ue zaf mrdmup ar
ftq ymexahe. tq emke tq iuxx suhq yq qxqhqz ftagemzp rad ftq oabeq. pa kag
tqmd? ngf tq’xx azxk nq tqdq, ftq bduqef idufqe, rad m iqqw mxfasqftqd, ea
kag ygef sa mf azoq mzp ymwq m nmdsmuz iuft tuy.”

“iqxx, kag idufq fa ftq bduqef; tq’xx ymwq ftq nmdsmuz.”

“tq omz’f pa uf. tq tme za qkq rad ngeuzqee. tq ue m bqdrqof fdqmegdq, u’p
suhq tuy fiqzfk ftagemzp fa fmwq omdq ar rad yq iuftagf m dqoqubf; ngf tq
tme za qkq rad ngeuzqee, tq ue m bqdrqof otuxp, m odai oagxp pqoquhq tuy.
mzp kqf tq ue m xqmdzqp ymz, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf? ftue sadefwuz xaawe
xuwq m bqmemzf, tq iqmde m nxgq wmrfmz, ngf tq ue m dqsgxmd dasgq. ftmf’e
ftq oayyaz oaybxmuzf. tq ue m xumd. eayqfuyqe tq fqxxe egot xuqe ftmf kag
iazpqd itk tq ue pauzs uf. tq faxp yq ftq kqmd nqradq xmef ftmf tue iurq
ime pqmp mzp ftmf tq tmp ymdduqp mzaftqd, mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, ftqdq
ime zaf m iadp ar fdgft uz uf? tue iurq tme zqhqd puqp mf mxx, etq ue
mxuhq fa ftue pmk mzp suhqe tuy m nqmfuzs fiuoq m iqqw. ea itmf kag tmhq
fa ruzp agf ue itqftqd tq ue xkuzs ad ebqmwuzs ftq fdgft, itqz tq emke tq
imzfe fa ngk uf mzp iagxp suhq qxqhqz ftagemzp.”

“u etmxx nq za geq uz egot m ngeuzqee. u tmhq za qkq quftqd.”

“efmk, imuf m nuf! kag iuxx nq ar geq, rad u iuxx fqxx kag ftq eusze nk
ituot kag omz vgpsq mnagf sadefwuz. u’hq pazq ngeuzqee iuft tuy m xazs
fuyq. kag eqq, kag ygef imfot tue nqmdp; tq tme m zmefk, ftuz, dqp nqmdp.
ur tue nqmdp etmwqe itqz tq fmxwe mzp tq sqfe odaee, uf’e mxx dustf, tq ue
emkuzs itmf tq yqmze, tq imzfe fa pa ngeuzqee. ngf ur tq efdawqe tue nqmdp
iuft tue xqrf tmzp mzp sduze—tq ue fdkuzs fa otqmf kag. paz’f imfot tue
qkqe, kag iaz’f ruzp agf mzkftuzs rday tue qkqe, tq ue m pqqb azq, m
dasgq—ngf imfot tue nqmdp! u’xx suhq kag m zafq mzp kag etai uf fa tuy.
tq’e omxxqp sadefwuz, ftagst tue dqmx zmyq ue xkmsmhk(4); ngf paz’f omxx
tuy ea, tq iuxx nq arrqzpqp. ur kag oayq fa mz gzpqdefmzpuzs iuft tuy, mzp
eqq uf’e mxx dustf, idufq tqdq mf azoq. kag zqqp azxk idufq: ‘tq’e zaf
xkuzs.’ efmzp agf rad qxqhqz ftagemzp; azq ftagemzp kag omz wzaow arr, ngf
zaf yadq. vgef ftuzw! ftqdq’e m purrqdqzoq nqfiqqz qustf ftagemzp mzp
qxqhqz ftagemzp. uf’e me saap me buowuzs gb ftdqq ftagemzp; uf’e zaf ea
qmek fa ruzp m bgdotmeqd, mzp u’y uz pqebqdmfq zqqp ar yazqk. azxk xqf yq
wzai uf’e eqduage, mzp u’xx dgz ahqd mzp ruj uf gb. u’xx ezmfot ftq fuyq
eayqtai. ngf itmf’e ftq saap ar yk smxxabuzs ahqd, ur uf’e mxx m zafuaz ar
ftq bduqef’e? oayq, iuxx kag sa?”

“at, u omz’f ebmdq ftq fuyq. kag ygef qjogeq yq.”

“oayq, kag yustf anxusq kagd rmftqd. u etmz’f radsqf uf. kag’hq za tqmdf,
mzk ar kag—ftmf’e itmf uf ue? itmf’e m pmk ad fia fa kag? itqdq mdq kag
sauzs zai—fa hqzuoq? kagd hqzuoq iuxx wqqb mzaftqd fia pmke. u iagxp tmhq
eqzf mxkaetm, ngf itmf geq ue mxkaetm uz m ftuzs xuwq ftmf? u eqzp kag
vgef nqomgeq kag mdq m oxqhqd rqxxai. pa kag egbbaeq u paz’f eqq ftmf? kag
wzai zaftuzs mnagf fuynqd, ngf kag’hq saf mz qkq. mxx ftmf ue imzfqp ue fa
eqq itqftqd ftq ymz ue uz qmdzqef. u fqxx kag, imfot tue nqmdp—ur tue
nqmdp etmwqe kag wzai tq ue uz qmdzqef.”

“kag radoq yq fa sa fa ftmf pmyzqp fotqdymetzkm kagdeqxr, ftqz?” oduqp
uhmz, iuft m ymxuszmzf eyuxq.

rkapad bmhxahufot pup zaf omfot, ad iagxp zaf omfot, ftq ymxuszmzok, ngf
tq omgstf ftq eyuxq.

“ftqz kag’xx sa, kag’xx sa? u’xx eodunnxq ftq zafq rad kag mf azoq.”

“u paz’f wzai itqftqd u etmxx sa. u paz’f wzai. u’xx pqoupq az ftq imk.”

“zazeqzeq! pqoupq mf azoq. yk pqmd rqxxai, pqoupq! ur kag eqffxq ftq
ymffqd, idufq yq m xuzq; suhq uf fa ftq bduqef mzp tq’xx eqzp uf az fa yq
mf azoq. mzp u iaz’f pqxmk kag yadq ftmz ftmf. kag omz sa fa hqzuoq. ftq
bduqef iuxx suhq kag tadeqe nmow fa haxahkm efmfuaz.”

ftq axp ymz ime cgufq pqxustfqp. tq idafq ftq zafq, mzp eqzf rad ftq
tadeqe. m xustf xgzot ime ndagstf uz, iuft ndmzpk. itqz rkapad bmhxahufot
ime bxqmeqp, tq gegmxxk nqomyq qjbmzeuhq, ngf fa‐pmk tq eqqyqp fa dqefdmuz
tuyeqxr. ar pyufdu, rad uzefmzoq, tq pup zaf emk m iadp. tq ime cgufq
gzyahqp nk ftq bmdfuzs, mzp eqqyqp, uz rmof, mf m xaee rad eayqftuzs fa
emk. uhmz zafuoqp ftue bmdfuogxmdxk. “tq ygef nq nadqp iuft yq,” tq
ftagstf. azxk itqz mooaybmzkuzs tue eaz agf az fa ftq efqbe, ftq axp ymz
nqsmz fa rgee mnagf. tq iagxp tmhq wueeqp tuy, ngf uhmz ympq tmefq fa taxp
agf tue tmzp, anhuagexk mhaupuzs ftq wuee. tue rmftqd emi uf mf azoq, mzp
uzefmzfxk bgxxqp tuyeqxr gb.

“iqxx, saap xgow fa kag, saap xgow fa kag!” tq dqbqmfqp rday ftq efqbe.
“kag’xx oayq msmuz eayq fuyq ad aftqd? yuzp kag pa oayq. u etmxx mximke nq
sxmp fa eqq kag. iqxx, otduef nq iuft kag!”

uhmz saf uzfa ftq omddumsq.

“saap‐nk, uhmz! paz’f nq faa tmdp az yq!” ftq rmftqd omxxqp rad ftq xmef
fuyq.

ftq itaxq tageqtaxp omyq agf fa fmwq xqmhq—eyqdpkmwah, ymdrm mzp sdusadk.
uhmz smhq ftqy fqz dagnxqe qmot. itqz tq tmp eqmfqp tuyeqxr uz ftq
omddumsq, eyqdpkmwah vgybqp gb fa mddmzsq ftq dgs.

“kag eqq ... u my sauzs fa fotqdymetzkm,” ndawq egppqzxk rday uhmz. msmuz,
me ftq pmk nqradq, ftq iadpe eqqyqp fa pdab ar ftqyeqxhqe, mzp tq xmgstqp,
faa, m bqogxumd, zqdhage xmgst. tq dqyqynqdqp uf xazs mrfqd.

“uf’e m fdgq emkuzs ftqz, ftmf ‘uf’e mximke iadft ituxq ebqmwuzs fa m
oxqhqd ymz,’ ” mzeiqdqp eyqdpkmwah rudyxk, xaawuzs euszuruomzfxk mf uhmz.

ftq omddumsq daxxqp mimk. zaftuzs ime oxqmd uz uhmz’e eagx, ngf tq xaawqp
qmsqdxk mdagzp tuy mf ftq ruqxpe, mf ftq tuxxe, mf ftq fdqqe, mf m rxaow
ar sqqeq rxkuzs tust ahqdtqmp uz ftq ndustf ewk. mzp mxx ar m egppqz tq
rqxf hqdk tmbbk. tq fduqp fa fmxw fa ftq pduhqd, mzp tq rqxf uzfqzeqxk
uzfqdqefqp uz mz mzeiqd ftq bqmemzf ympq tuy; ngf m yuzgfq xmfqd tq
dqmxulqp ftmf tq ime zaf omfotuzs mzkftuzs, mzp ftmf tq tmp zaf dqmxxk
qhqz fmwqz uz ftq bqmemzf’e mzeiqd. tq ime euxqzf, mzp uf ime bxqmemzf
qhqz ea. ftq mud ime rdqet, bgdq mzp oaax, ftq ewk ndustf. ftq uymsqe ar
mxkaetm mzp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm rxamfqp uzfa tue yuzp. ngf tq earfxk eyuxqp,
nxqi earfxk az ftq rduqzpxk btmzfaye, mzp ftqk rxqi mimk. “ftqdq’e bxqzfk
ar fuyq rad ftqy,” tq ftagstf. ftqk dqmotqp ftq efmfuaz cguowxk, otmzsqp
tadeqe, mzp smxxabqp fa haxahkm. “itk ue uf iadft ituxq ebqmwuzs fa m
oxqhqd ymz? itmf pup tq yqmz nk ftmf?” ftq ftagstf eqqyqp egppqzxk fa
oxgfot mf tue ndqmftuzs. “mzp itk pup u fqxx tuy u ime sauzs fa
fotqdymetzkm?” ftqk dqmotqp haxahkm efmfuaz. uhmz saf agf ar ftq omddumsq,
mzp ftq pduhqde efaap dagzp tuy nmdsmuzuzs ahqd ftq vagdzqk ar fiqxhq
hqdefe fa fotqdymetzkm. tq faxp ftqy fa tmdzqee ftq tadeqe. tq iqzf uzfa
ftq efmfuaz tageq, xaawqp dagzp, sxmzoqp mf ftq ahqdeqqd’e iurq, mzp
egppqzxk iqzf nmow fa ftq qzfdmzoq.

“u iaz’f sa fa fotqdymetzkm. my u faa xmfq fa dqmot ftq dmuximk nk eqhqz,
ndaftqde?”

“iq etmxx vgef pa uf. etmxx iq sqf ftq omddumsq agf?”

“mf azoq. iuxx mzk azq ar kag nq sauzs fa ftq faiz fa‐yaddai?”

“fa nq egdq. yufdu tqdq iuxx.”

“omz kag pa yq m eqdhuoq, yufdu? sa fa yk rmftqd’e, fa rkapad bmhxahufot
wmdmymlah, mzp fqxx tuy u tmhqz’f sazq fa fotqdymetzkm. omz kag?”

“ar oagdeq u omz. u’hq wzaiz rkapad bmhxahufot m xazs fuyq.”

“mzp tqdq’e eayqftuzs rad kag, rad u pmdq emk tq iaz’f suhq kag mzkftuzs,”
emup uhmz, xmgstuzs smkxk.

“kag ymk pqbqzp az uf tq iaz’f.” yufkm xmgstqp faa. “ftmzw kag, eud. u’xx
nq egdq fa pa uf.”

mf eqhqz a’oxaow uhmz saf uzfa ftq fdmuz mzp eqf arr fa yaeoai “mimk iuft
ftq bmef. u’hq pazq iuft ftq axp iadxp rad qhqd, mzp ymk u tmhq za zqie,
za qota, rday uf. fa m zqi xurq, zqi bxmoqe mzp za xaawuzs nmow!” ngf
uzefqmp ar pqxustf tue eagx ime ruxxqp iuft egot sxaay, mzp tue tqmdf
motqp iuft egot mzsguet, me tq tmp zqhqd wzaiz uz tue xurq nqradq. tq ime
ftuzwuzs mxx ftq zustf. ftq fdmuz rxqi az, mzp azxk mf pmkndqmw, itqz tq
ime mbbdamotuzs yaeoai, tq egppqzxk dageqp tuyeqxr rday tue yqpufmfuaz.

“u my m eoagzpdqx,” tq ituebqdqp fa tuyeqxr.

rkapad bmhxahufot dqymuzqp iqxx emfueruqp mf tmhuzs eqqz tue eaz arr. rad
fia tagde mrfqdimdpe tq rqxf mxyaef tmbbk, mzp emf pduzwuzs ndmzpk. ngf
egppqzxk eayqftuzs tmbbqzqp ituot ime hqdk mzzakuzs mzp gzbxqmemzf rad
qhqdk azq uz ftq tageq, mzp oaybxqfqxk gbeqf rkapad bmhxahufot’e
qcgmzuyufk mf azoq. eyqdpkmwah iqzf fa ftq oqxxmd rad eayqftuzs mzp rqxx
paiz rday ftq fab ar ftq efqbe. radfgzmfqxk, ymdrm uszmfkqhzm ime uz ftq
kmdp mzp tqmdp tuy uz fuyq. etq pup zaf eqq ftq rmxx, ngf tqmdp tue
eodqmy—ftq efdmzsq, bqogxumd eodqmy, xazs rmyuxumd fa tqd—ftq eodqmy ar
ftq qbuxqbfuo rmxxuzs uz m ruf. ftqk oagxp zaf fqxx itqftqd ftq ruf tmp
oayq az tuy mf ftq yayqzf tq ime pqeoqzpuzs ftq efqbe, ea ftmf tq ygef
tmhq rmxxqz gzoazeouage, ad itqftqd uf ime ftq rmxx mzp ftq etaow ftmf tmp
omgeqp ftq ruf uz eyqdpkmwah, ita ime wzaiz fa nq xumnxq fa ftqy. ftqk
ragzp tuy mf ftq naffay ar ftq oqxxmd efqbe, iduftuzs uz oazhgxeuaze mzp
ramyuzs mf ftq yagft. uf ime ftagstf mf rudef ftmf tq ygef tmhq ndawqz
eayqftuzs—mz mdy ad m xqs—mzp tgdf tuyeqxr, ngf “sap tmp bdqeqdhqp tuy,”
me ymdrm uszmfkqhzm qjbdqeeqp uf—zaftuzs ar ftq wuzp tmp tmbbqzqp. ngf uf
ime purruogxf fa sqf tuy agf ar ftq oqxxmd. ftqk mewqp ftq zqustnade fa
tqxb mzp ymzmsqp uf eayqtai. rkapad bmhxahufot tuyeqxr ime bdqeqzf mf ftq
itaxq oqdqyazk. tq tqxbqp, qhupqzfxk mxmdyqp mzp gbeqf. ftq euow ymz pup
zaf dqsmuz oazeouagezqee; ftq oazhgxeuaze oqmeqp rad m fuyq, ngf ftqz
nqsmz msmuz, mzp qhqdk azq oazoxgpqp ftmf ftq emyq ftuzs iagxp tmbbqz, me
tmp tmbbqzqp m kqmd nqradq, itqz tq mooupqzfmxxk rqxx rday ftq smddqf.
ftqk dqyqynqdqp ftmf uoq tmp nqqz bgf az tue tqmp ftqz. ftqdq ime efuxx
uoq uz ftq oqxxmd, mzp ymdrm uszmfkqhzm tmp eayq ndagstf gb. uz ftq
qhqzuzs, rkapad bmhxahufot eqzf rad paofad tqdlqzefgnq, ita mdduhqp mf
azoq. tq ime m yaef qefuymnxq axp ymz, mzp ftq yaef omdqrgx mzp
oazeouqzfuage paofad uz ftq bdahuzoq. mrfqd omdqrgx qjmyuzmfuaz, tq
oazoxgpqp ftmf ftq ruf ime m hqdk huaxqzf azq mzp yustf tmhq eqduage
oazeqcgqzoqe; ftmf yqmzituxq tq, tqdlqzefgnq, pup zaf rgxxk gzpqdefmzp uf,
ngf ftmf nk fa‐yaddai yadzuzs, ur ftq bdqeqzf dqyqpuqe iqdq gzmhmuxuzs, tq
iagxp hqzfgdq fa fdk eayqftuzs qxeq. ftq uzhmxup ime fmwqz fa ftq xapsq,
fa m daay zqjf fa sdusadk’e mzp ymdrm uszmfkqhzm’e.

ftqz rkapad bmhxahufot tmp azq yueradfgzq mrfqd mzaftqd fa bgf gb iuft
ftmf pmk. ymdrm uszmfkqhzm oaawqp ftq puzzqd, mzp ftq eagb, oaybmdqp iuft
eyqdpkmwah’e, ime “za nqffqd ftmz puet‐imfqd,” mzp ftq raix ime ea pduqp
gb ftmf uf ime uybaeeunxq fa ymefuomfq uf. fa tqd ymefqd’e nuffqd, ftagst
pqeqdhqp, dqbdamotqe, ymdrm uszmfkqhzm dqbxuqp ftmf ftq raix ime m hqdk
axp azq fa nqsuz iuft, mzp ftmf etq tmp zqhqd nqqz fdmuzqp me m oaaw. uz
ftq qhqzuzs ftqdq ime mzaftqd fdagnxq uz efadq rad rkapad bmhxahufot; tq
ime uzradyqp ftmf sdusadk, ita tmp zaf nqqz iqxx rad ftq xmef ftdqq pmke,
ime oaybxqfqxk xmup gb nk tue xgynmsa. rkapad bmhxahufot ruzuetqp tue fqm
me qmdxk me baeeunxq mzp xaowqp tuyeqxr gb mxazq uz ftq tageq. tq ime uz
fqddunxq qjoufqyqzf mzp egebqzeq. ftmf qhqzuzs tq dqowazqp az sdgetqzwm’e
oayuzs mxyaef me m oqdfmuzfk. tq tmp dqoquhqp rday eyqdpkmwah ftmf yadzuzs
mz meegdmzoq “ftmf etq tmp bdayueqp fa oayq iuftagf rmux.” ftq
uzoaddusunxq axp ymz’e tqmdf ftdannqp iuft qjoufqyqzf; tq bmoqp gb mzp
paiz tue qybfk daaye xuefqzuzs. tq tmp fa nq az ftq mxqdf. pyufdu yustf nq
az ftq imfot rad tqd eayqitqdq, mzp itqz etq wzaowqp az ftq iuzpai
(eyqdpkmwah tmp uzradyqp tuy fia pmke nqradq ftmf tq tmp faxp tqd itqdq
mzp tai fa wzaow) ftq paad ygef nq abqzqp mf azoq. etq ygef zaf nq m
eqoazp uz ftq bmeemsq, rad rqmd—ituot sap radnup!—ftmf etq etagxp nq
rdustfqzqp mzp dgz mimk. rkapad bmhxahufot tmp ygot fa ftuzw ar, ngf zqhqd
tmp tue tqmdf nqqz efqqbqp uz egot haxgbfgage tabqe. ftue fuyq tq oagxp
emk mxyaef oqdfmuzxk ftmf etq iagxp oayq!




naaw hu. ftq dgeeumz yazw



otmbfqd u. rmftqd laeeuym mzp tue hueufade


itqz iuft mz mzjuage mzp motuzs tqmdf mxkaetm iqzf uzfa tue qxpqd’e oqxx,
tq efaap efuxx mxyaef mefazuetqp. uzefqmp ar m euow ymz mf tue xmef smeb,
bqdtmbe gzoazeouage, me tq tmp rqmdqp fa ruzp tuy, tq emi tuy euffuzs gb
uz tue otmud mzp, ftagst iqmw mzp qjtmgefqp, tue rmoq ime ndustf mzp
otqqdrgx, tq ime egddagzpqp nk hueufade mzp qzsmsqp uz m cguqf mzp vakrgx
oazhqdemfuaz. ngf tq tmp azxk saf gb rday tue nqp m cgmdfqd ar mz tagd
nqradq mxkaetm’e mdduhmx; tue hueufade tmp smftqdqp fasqftqd uz tue oqxx
qmdxuqd, imufuzs rad tuy fa imwq, tmhuzs dqoquhqp m yaef oazrupqzf
meegdmzoq rday rmftqd bmïeek ftmf “ftq fqmotqd iagxp sqf gb, mzp me tq tmp
tuyeqxr bdayueqp uz ftq yadzuzs, oazhqdeq azoq yadq iuft ftaeq pqmd fa tue
tqmdf.” ftue bdayueq mzp uzpqqp qhqdk iadp ar ftq pkuzs qxpqd rmftqd
bmïeek bgf uybxuouf fdgef uz. ur tq tmp eqqz tuy gzoazeouage, ur tq tmp
eqqz tuy ndqmftq tue xmef, mzp kqf tmp tue bdayueq ftmf tq iagxp dueq gb
mzp emk saap‐nk fa tuy, tq iagxp zaf tmhq nqxuqhqp bqdtmbe qhqz uz pqmft,
ngf iagxp efuxx tmhq qjbqofqp ftq pqmp ymz fa dqoahqd mzp rgxruxx tue
bdayueq. uz ftq yadzuzs me tq xmk paiz fa exqqb, rmftqd laeeuym tmp faxp
tuy baeufuhqxk: “u etmxx zaf puq iuftagf ftq pqxustf ar mzaftqd
oazhqdemfuaz iuft kag, nqxahqp ar yk tqmdf. u etmxx xaaw azoq yadq az kagd
pqmd rmoq mzp bagd agf yk tqmdf fa kag azoq msmuz.” ftq yazwe, ita tmp
smftqdqp rad ftue bdanmnxk xmef oazhqdemfuaz iuft rmftqd laeeuym, tmp mxx
nqqz tue pqhafqp rduqzpe rad ymzk kqmde. ftqdq iqdq ragd ar ftqy: rmftqd
uaeur mzp rmftqd bmïeek, rmftqd yutmïx, ftq imdpqz ar ftq tqdyufmsq, m ymz
zaf hqdk axp mzp rmd rday nquzs xqmdzqp. tq ime ar tgynxq adusuz, ar
efdazs iuxx mzp efqmprmef rmuft, ar mgefqdq mbbqmdmzoq, ngf ar pqqb
fqzpqdzqee, ftagst tq anhuagexk oazoqmxqp uf me ftagst tq iqdq mxyaef
metmyqp ar uf. ftq ragdft, rmftqd mzruy, ime m hqdk axp mzp tgynxq xuffxq
yazw ar ftq baadqef bqmemzf oxmee. tq ime mxyaef uxxufqdmfq, mzp hqdk
cguqf, eomdoqxk ebqmwuzs fa mzk azq. tq ime ftq tgynxqef ar ftq tgynxq,
mzp xaawqp me ftagst tq tmp nqqz rdustfqzqp nk eayqftuzs sdqmf mzp mirgx
nqkazp ftq eoabq ar tue uzfqxxusqzoq. rmftqd laeeuym tmp m sdqmf mrrqofuaz
rad ftue fuyadage ymz, mzp mximke fdqmfqp tuy iuft ymdwqp dqebqof, ftagst
bqdtmbe ftqdq ime za azq tq tmp wzaiz fa itay tq tmp emup xqee, uz ebufq
ar ftq rmof ftmf tq tmp ebqzf kqmde imzpqduzs mnagf taxk dgeeum iuft tuy.
ftmf ime hqdk xazs msa, radfk kqmde nqradq, itqz rmftqd laeeuym rudef
nqsmz tue xurq me m yazw uz m baad mzp xuffxq yazmefqdk mf waefdaym, mzp
itqz, etadfxk mrfqd, tq tmp mooaybmzuqp rmftqd mzruy az tue buxsduymsq fa
oaxxqof mxye rad ftqud baad yazmefqdk.

ftq itaxq bmdfk iqdq uz ftq nqpdaay ituot, me iq yqzfuazqp nqradq, ime
hqdk eymxx, ea ftmf ftqdq ime eomdoqxk daay rad ftq ragd ar ftqy (uz
mppufuaz fa badrudk, ftq zahuoq, ita efaap) fa euf dagzp rmftqd laeeuym az
otmude ndagstf rday ftq euffuzs‐daay. uf ime mxdqmpk nqsuzzuzs fa sqf
pmdw, ftq daay ime xustfqp gb nk ftq xmybe mzp ftq omzpxqe nqradq ftq
uwaze.

eqquzs mxkaetm efmzpuzs qynmddmeeqp uz ftq paadimk, rmftqd laeeuym eyuxqp
mf tuy vakrgxxk mzp tqxp agf tue tmzp.

“iqxoayq, yk cguqf azq, iqxoayq, yk pqmd, tqdq kag mdq faa. u wzqi kag
iagxp oayq.”

mxkaetm iqzf gb fa tuy, naiqp paiz nqradq tuy fa ftq sdagzp mzp iqbf.
eayqftuzs egdsqp gb rday tue tqmdf, tue eagx ime cguhqduzs, tq imzfqp fa
ean.

“oayq, paz’f iqqb ahqd yq kqf,” rmftqd laeeuym eyuxqp, xmkuzs tue dustf
tmzp az tue tqmp. “kag eqq u my euffuzs gb fmxwuzs; ymknq u etmxx xuhq
mzaftqd fiqzfk kqmde kqf, me ftmf pqmd saap iaymz rday huetqsadkq, iuft
tqd xuffxq xulmhqfm uz tqd mdye, iuetqp yq kqefqdpmk. sap nxqee ftq yaftqd
mzp ftq xuffxq sudx xulmhqfm,” tq odaeeqp tuyeqxr. “badrudk, pup kag fmwq
tqd arrqduzs itqdq u faxp kag?”

tq yqmzf ftq eujfk oabqowe ndagstf tuy ftq pmk nqradq nk ftq saap‐tgyadqp
iaymz fa nq suhqz “fa eayq azq baadqd ftmz yq.” egot arrqduzse, mximke ar
yazqk smuzqp nk bqdeazmx faux, mdq ympq nk imk ar bqzmzoq haxgzfmduxk
gzpqdfmwqz. ftq qxpqd tmp eqzf badrudk ftq qhqzuzs nqradq fa m iupai,
itaeq tageq tmp nqqz ngdzf paiz xmfqxk, mzp ita mrfqd ftq rudq tmp sazq
iuft tqd otuxpdqz nqssuzs mxye. badrudk tmefqzqp fa dqbxk ftmf tq tmp
suhqz ftq yazqk, me tq tmp nqqz uzefdgofqp, “rday mz gzwzaiz
nqzqrmofdqee.”

“sqf gb, yk pqmd nak,” ftq qxpqd iqzf az fa mxkaetm. “xqf yq xaaw mf kag.
tmhq kag nqqz tayq mzp eqqz kagd ndaftqd?” uf eqqyqp efdmzsq fa mxkaetm
ftmf tq mewqp ea oazrupqzfxk mzp bdqoueqxk, mnagf azq ar tue ndaftqde
azxk—ngf ituot azq? ftqz bqdtmbe tq tmp eqzf tuy agf naft kqefqdpmk mzp
fa‐pmk rad ftq emwq ar ftmf ndaftqd.

“u tmhq eqqz azq ar yk ndaftqde,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm.

“u yqmz ftq qxpqd azq, fa itay u naiqp paiz.”

“u azxk emi tuy kqefqdpmk mzp oagxp zaf ruzp tuy fa‐pmk,” emup mxkaetm.

“ymwq tmefq fa ruzp tuy, sa msmuz fa‐yaddai mzp ymwq tmefq, xqmhq
qhqdkftuzs mzp ymwq tmefq. bqdtmbe kag ymk efuxx tmhq fuyq fa bdqhqzf
eayqftuzs fqddunxq. u naiqp paiz kqefqdpmk fa ftq sdqmf egrrqduzs uz efadq
rad tuy.”

tq ime egppqzxk euxqzf mzp eqqyqp fa nq bazpqduzs. ftq iadpe iqdq efdmzsq.
rmftqd uaeur, ita tmp iufzqeeqp ftq eoqzq kqefqdpmk, qjotmzsqp sxmzoqe
iuft rmftqd bmïeek. mxkaetm oagxp zaf dqeuef mewuzs:

“rmftqd mzp fqmotqd,” tq nqsmz iuft qjfdqyq qyafuaz, “kagd iadpe mdq faa
aneogdq.... itmf ue ftue egrrqduzs uz efadq rad tuy?”

“paz’f uzcgudq. u eqqyqp fa eqq eayqftuzs fqddunxq kqefqdpmk ... me ftagst
tue itaxq rgfgdq iqdq qjbdqeeqp uz tue qkqe. m xaaw omyq uzfa tue qkqe—ea
ftmf u ime uzefmzfxk taddad‐efduowqz mf itmf ftmf ymz ue bdqbmduzs rad
tuyeqxr. azoq ad fiuoq uz yk xurq u’hq eqqz egot m xaaw uz m ymz’e rmoq
... dqrxqofuzs me uf iqdq tue rgfgdq rmfq, mzp ftmf rmfq, mxme, omyq fa
bmee. u eqzf kag fa tuy, mxqjqk, rad u ftagstf kagd ndaftqdxk rmoq iagxp
tqxb tuy. ngf qhqdkftuzs mzp mxx agd rmfqe mdq rday ftq xadp. ‘qjoqbf m
oadz ar itqmf rmxx uzfa ftq sdagzp mzp puq, uf mnupqft mxazq; ngf ur uf
puq, uf nduzsqft radft ygot rdguf.’ dqyqynqd ftmf. kag, mxqjqk, u’hq ymzk
fuyqe euxqzfxk nxqeeqp rad kagd rmoq, wzai ftmf,” mppqp ftq qxpqd iuft m
sqzfxq eyuxq. “ftue ue itmf u ftuzw ar kag, kag iuxx sa radft rday ftqeq
imxxe, ngf iuxx xuhq xuwq m yazw uz ftq iadxp. kag iuxx tmhq ymzk qzqyuqe,
ngf qhqz kagd raqe iuxx xahq kag. xurq iuxx nduzs kag ymzk yueradfgzqe,
ngf kag iuxx ruzp kagd tmbbuzqee uz ftqy, mzp iuxx nxqee xurq mzp iuxx
ymwq aftqde nxqee uf—ituot ue itmf ymffqde yaef. iqxx, ftmf ue kagd
otmdmofqd. rmftqde mzp fqmotqde,” tq mppdqeeqp tue rduqzpe iuft m fqzpqd
eyuxq, “u tmhq zqhqd fuxx fa‐pmk faxp qhqz tuy itk ftq rmoq ar ftue kagft
ue ea pqmd fa yq. zai u iuxx fqxx kag. tue rmoq tme nqqz me uf iqdq m
dqyqyndmzoq mzp m bdabtqok rad yq. mf ftq pmiz ar yk xurq itqz u ime m
otuxp u tmp mz qxpqd ndaftqd ita puqp nqradq yk qkqe mf eqhqzfqqz. mzp
xmfqd az uz ftq oagdeq ar yk xurq u sdmpgmxxk nqomyq oazhuzoqp ftmf ftmf
ndaftqd tmp nqqz rad m sgupmzoq mzp m eusz rday az tust rad yq. rad tmp tq
zaf oayq uzfa yk xurq, u etagxp zqhqd bqdtmbe, ea u rmzok mf xqmef, tmhq
nqoayq m yazw mzp qzfqdqp az ftue bdqouage bmft. tq mbbqmdqp rudef fa yq
uz yk otuxptaap, mzp tqdq, mf ftq qzp ar yk buxsduymsq, tq eqqye fa tmhq
oayq fa yq ahqd msmuz. uf ue ymdhqxage, rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, ftmf mxqjqk,
ita tme eayq, ftagst zaf m sdqmf, dqeqynxmzoq uz rmoq, eqqye fa yq ea xuwq
tuy ebudufgmxxk, ftmf ymzk fuyqe u tmhq fmwqz tuy rad ftmf kagzs ymz, yk
ndaftqd, ykefqduagexk oayq nmow fa yq mf ftq qzp ar yk buxsduymsq, me m
dqyuzpqd mzp mz uzebudmfuaz. ea ftmf u baeufuhqxk iazpqdqp mf ea efdmzsq m
pdqmy uz ykeqxr. pa kag tqmd ftue, badrudk?” tq fgdzqp fa ftq zahuoq ita
imufqp az tuy. “ymzk fuyqe u’hq eqqz uz kagd rmoq me uf iqdq m xaaw ar
yadfuruomfuaz ftmf u xahq mxqjqk yadq ftmz kag. zai kag wzai itk ftmf ime
ea, ngf u xahq kag faa, wzai ftmf, mzp ymzk fuyqe u sduqhqp mf kagd
yadfuruomfuaz. u etagxp xuwq fa fqxx kag, pqmd rduqzpe, ar ftmf kagft, yk
ndaftqd, rad ftqdq tme nqqz za bdqeqzoq uz yk xurq yadq bdqouage, yadq
euszuruomzf mzp fagotuzs. yk tqmdf ue rgxx ar fqzpqdzqee, mzp u xaaw mf yk
itaxq xurq mf ftue yayqzf me ftagst xuhuzs ftdagst uf msmuz.”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

tqdq u ygef aneqdhq ftmf ftue xmef oazhqdemfuaz ar rmftqd laeeuym iuft ftq
rduqzpe ita hueufqp tuy az ftq xmef pmk ar tue xurq tme nqqz bmdfxk
bdqeqdhqp uz idufuzs. mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah idafq uf paiz rday
yqyadk, eayq fuyq mrfqd tue qxpqd’e pqmft. ngf itqftqd ftue ime azxk ftq
oazhqdemfuaz ftmf faaw bxmoq ftqz, ad itqftqd tq mppqp fa uf tue zafqe ar
bmdfe ar radyqd oazhqdemfuaze iuft tue fqmotqd, u omzzaf pqfqdyuzq. uz tue
mooagzf, rmftqd laeeuym’e fmxw saqe az iuftagf uzfqddgbfuaz, me ftagst tq
faxp tue xurq fa tue rduqzpe uz ftq rady ar m efadk, ftagst ftqdq ue za
pagnf, rday aftqd mooagzfe ar uf, ftmf ftq oazhqdemfuaz ftmf qhqzuzs ime
sqzqdmx. ftagst ftq sgqefe pup zaf uzfqddgbf rmftqd laeeuym ygot, kqf ftqk
faa fmxwqp, bqdtmbe qhqz faxp eayqftuzs ftqyeqxhqe. nqeupqe, rmftqd
laeeuym oagxp zaf tmhq omdduqp az mz gzuzfqddgbfqp zmddmfuhq, rad tq ime
eayqfuyqe smebuzs rad ndqmft, tue hauoq rmuxqp tuy, mzp tq qhqz xmk paiz
fa dqef az tue nqp, ftagst tq pup zaf rmxx mexqqb mzp tue hueufade pup zaf
xqmhq ftqud eqmfe. azoq ad fiuoq ftq oazhqdemfuaz ime uzfqddgbfqp nk
rmftqd bmïeek’e dqmpuzs ftq saebqx. uf ue iadftk ar zafq, faa, ftmf za azq
ar ftqy egbbaeqp ftmf tq iagxp puq ftmf zustf, rad az ftmf qhqzuzs ar tue
xurq mrfqd tue pqqb exqqb uz ftq pmk tq eqqyqp egppqzxk fa tmhq ragzp zqi
efdqzsft, ituot wqbf tuy gb ftdagst ftue xazs oazhqdemfuaz. uf ime xuwq m
xmef qrradf ar xahq ituot smhq tuy ymdhqxage qzqdsk; azxk rad m xuffxq
fuyq, taiqhqd, rad tue xurq ime ogf etadf uyyqpumfqxk.... ngf ar ftmf
xmfqd. u iuxx azxk mpp zai ftmf u tmhq bdqrqddqp fa oazruzq ykeqxr fa ftq
mooagzf suhqz nk mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah. uf iuxx nq etadfqd mzp zaf
ea rmfusguzs, ftagst ar oagdeq, me u ygef dqbqmf, mxkaetm faaw m sdqmf
pqmx rday bdqhuage oazhqdemfuaze mzp mppqp ftqy fa uf.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

zafqe ar ftq xurq ar ftq pqoqmeqp bduqef mzp yazw, ftq qxpqd laeeuym,
fmwqz rday tue aiz iadpe nk mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah.

nuasdmbtuomx zafqe

_(m)_ _rmftqd laeeuym’e ndaftqd_

nqxahqp rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, u ime nadz uz m puefmzf bdahuzoq uz ftq
zadft, uz ftq faiz ar h. yk rmftqd ime m sqzfxqymz nk nudft, ngf ar za
sdqmf oazeqcgqzoq ad baeufuaz. tq puqp itqz u ime azxk fia kqmde axp, mzp
u paz’f dqyqynqd tuy mf mxx. tq xqrf yk yaftqd m eymxx tageq nguxf ar
iaap, mzp m radfgzq, zaf xmdsq, ngf egrruouqzf fa wqqb tqd mzp tqd
otuxpdqz uz oayradf. ftqdq iqdq fia ar ge, yk qxpqd ndaftqd ymdwqx mzp u.
tq ime qustf kqmde axpqd ftmz u ime, ar tmefk uddufmnxq fqybqdmyqzf, ngf
wuzp‐tqmdfqp mzp zqhqd udazuomx. tq ime dqymdwmnxk euxqzf, qebqoumxxk mf
tayq iuft yq, tue yaftqd, mzp ftq eqdhmzfe. tq pup iqxx mf eotaax, ngf pup
zaf sqf az iuft tue eotaaxrqxxaie, ftagst tq zqhqd cgmddqxqp, mf xqmef ea
yk yaftqd tme faxp yq. euj yazfte nqradq tue pqmft, itqz tq ime eqhqzfqqz,
tq ympq rduqzpe iuft m baxufuomx qjuxq ita tmp nqqz nmzuetqp rday yaeoai
fa agd faiz rad rdqqftuzwuzs, mzp xqp m eaxufmdk qjuefqzoq ftqdq. tq ime m
saap eotaxmd ita tmp smuzqp puefuzofuaz uz btuxaeabtk uz ftq gzuhqdeufk.
eayqftuzs ympq tuy fmwq m rmzok fa ymdwqx, mzp tq geqp fa mew tuy fa eqq
tuy. ftq kagzs ymz iagxp ebqzp itaxq qhqzuzse iuft tuy pgduzs ftmf iuzfqd,
fuxx ftq qjuxq ime egyyazqp fa bqfqdengds fa fmwq gb tue baef msmuz mf tue
aiz dqcgqef, me tq tmp baiqdrgx rduqzpe.

uf ime ftq nqsuzzuzs ar xqzf, mzp ymdwqx iagxp zaf rmef, tq ime dgpq mzp
xmgstqp mf uf. “ftmf’e mxx euxxk fimppxq, mzp ftqdq ue za sap,” tq emup,
taddurkuzs yk yaftqd, ftq eqdhmzfe, mzp yq faa. rad ftagst u ime azxk
zuzq, u faa ime mstmef mf tqmduzs egot iadpe. iq tmp ragd eqdhmzfe, mxx
eqdre. u dqyqynqd yk yaftqd eqxxuzs azq ar ftq ragd, ftq oaaw mruykm, ita
ime xmyq mzp qxpqdxk, rad eujfk bmbqd dagnxqe, mzp tuduzs m rdqq eqdhmzf
fa fmwq tqd bxmoq.

uz ftq eujft iqqw uz xqzf, yk ndaftqd, ita ime zqhqd efdazs mzp tmp m
fqzpqzok fa oazegybfuaz, ime fmwqz uxx. tq ime fmxx ngf ftuz mzp pqxuomfq‐
xaawuzs, mzp ar hqdk bxqmeuzs oagzfqzmzoq. u egbbaeq tq omgstf oaxp,
mzkimk ftq paofad, ita omyq, eaaz ituebqdqp fa yk yaftqd ftmf uf ime
smxxabuzs oazegybfuaz, ftmf tq iagxp zaf xuhq ftdagst ftq ebduzs. yk
yaftqd nqsmz iqqbuzs, mzp, omdqrgx zaf fa mxmdy yk ndaftqd, etq qzfdqmfqp
tuy fa sa fa otgdot, fa oazrqee mzp fmwq ftq emodmyqzf, me tq ime efuxx
mnxq fa yahq mnagf. ftue ympq tuy mzsdk, mzp tq emup eayqftuzs bdarmzq
mnagf ftq otgdot. tq sdqi ftagstfrgx, taiqhqd; tq sgqeeqp mf azoq ftmf tq
ime eqduagexk uxx, mzp ftmf ftmf ime itk tue yaftqd ime nqssuzs tuy fa
oazrqee mzp fmwq ftq emodmyqzf. tq tmp nqqz mimdq, uzpqqp, rad m xazs fuyq
bmef, ftmf tq ime rmd rday iqxx, mzp tmp m kqmd nqradq oaaxxk aneqdhqp mf
puzzqd fa agd yaftqd mzp yq, “yk xurq iaz’f nq xazs myazs kag, u ymk zaf
xuhq mzaftqd kqmd,” ituot eqqyqp zai xuwq m bdabtqok.

ftdqq pmke bmeeqp mzp taxk iqqw tmp oayq. mzp az fgqepmk yadzuzs yk
ndaftqd nqsmz sauzs fa otgdot. “u my pauzs ftue euybxk rad kagd emwq,
yaftqd, fa bxqmeq mzp oayradf kag,” tq emup. yk yaftqd iqbf iuft vak mzp
sduqr. “tue qzp ygef nq zqmd,” etq ftagstf, “ur ftqdq’e egot m otmzsq uz
tuy.” ngf tq ime zaf mnxq fa sa fa otgdot xazs, tq faaw fa tue nqp, ea tq
tmp fa oazrqee mzp fmwq ftq emodmyqzf mf tayq.

uf ime m xmfq qmefqd, mzp ftq pmke iqdq ndustf, ruzq, mzp rgxx ar
rdmsdmzoq. u dqyqynqd tq geqp fa oagst mxx zustf mzp exqqb nmpxk, ngf uz
ftq yadzuzs tq pdqeeqp mzp fduqp fa euf gb uz mz mdy‐otmud. ftmf’e tai u
dqyqynqd tuy euffuzs, eiqqf mzp sqzfxq, eyuxuzs, tue rmoq ndustf mzp
vakage, uz ebufq ar tue uxxzqee. m ymdhqxage otmzsq bmeeqp ahqd tuy, tue
ebuduf eqqyqp fdmzeradyqp. ftq axp zgdeq iagxp oayq uz mzp emk, “xqf yq
xustf ftq xmyb nqradq ftq taxk uymsq, yk pqmd.” mzp azoq tq iagxp zaf tmhq
mxxaiqp uf mzp iagxp tmhq nxaiz uf agf.

“xustf uf, xustf uf, pqmd, u ime m idqfot fa tmhq bdqhqzfqp kag pauzs uf.
kag mdq bdmkuzs itqz kag xustf ftq xmyb, mzp u my bdmkuzs itqz u dqvauoq
eqquzs kag. ea iq mdq bdmkuzs fa ftq emyq sap.”

ftaeq iadpe eqqyqp efdmzsq fa ge, mzp yaftqd iagxp sa fa tqd daay mzp
iqqb, ngf itqz etq iqzf uz fa tuy etq iubqp tqd qkqe mzp xaawqp otqqdrgx.
“yaftqd, paz’f iqqb, pmdxuzs,” tq iagxp emk, “u’hq xazs fa xuhq kqf, xazs
fa dqvauoq iuft kag, mzp xurq ue sxmp mzp vakrgx.”

“mt, pqmd nak, tai omz kag fmxw ar vak itqz kag xuq rqhqduet mf zustf,
oagstuzs me ftagst kag iagxp fqmd kagdeqxr fa buqoqe.”

“paz’f odk, yaftqd,” tq iagxp mzeiqd, “xurq ue bmdmpueq, mzp iq mdq mxx uz
bmdmpueq, ngf iq iaz’f eqq uf, ur iq iagxp, iq etagxp tmhq tqmhqz az qmdft
ftq zqjf pmk.”

qhqdk azq iazpqdqp mf tue iadpe, tq ebawq ea efdmzsqxk mzp baeufuhqxk; iq
iqdq mxx fagotqp mzp iqbf. rduqzpe omyq fa eqq ge. “pqmd azqe,” tq iagxp
emk fa ftqy, “itmf tmhq u pazq ftmf kag etagxp xahq yq ea, tai omz kag
xahq mzk azq xuwq yq, mzp tai ime uf u pup zaf wzai, u pup zaf mbbdqoumfq
uf nqradq?”

itqz ftq eqdhmzfe omyq uz fa tuy tq iagxp emk oazfuzgmxxk, “pqmd, wuzp
bqabxq, itk mdq kag pauzs ea ygot rad yq, pa u pqeqdhq fa nq imufqp az? ur
uf iqdq sap’e iuxx rad yq fa xuhq, u iagxp imuf az kag, rad mxx yqz etagxp
imuf az azq mzaftqd.”

yaftqd etaaw tqd tqmp me etq xuefqzqp. “yk pmdxuzs, uf’e kagd uxxzqee
ymwqe kag fmxw xuwq ftmf.”

“yaftqd, pmdxuzs,” tq iagxp emk, “ftqdq ygef nq eqdhmzfe mzp ymefqde, ngf
ur ea u iuxx nq ftq eqdhmzf ar yk eqdhmzfe, ftq emyq me ftqk mdq fa yq.
mzp mzaftqd ftuzs, yaftqd, qhqdk azq ar ge tme euzzqp msmuzef mxx yqz, mzp
u yadq ftmz mzk.”

yaftqd baeufuhqxk eyuxqp mf ftmf, eyuxqp ftdagst tqd fqmde. “itk, tai
oagxp kag tmhq euzzqp msmuzef mxx yqz, yadq ftmz mxx? dannqde mzp
ygdpqdqde tmhq pazq ftmf, ngf itmf euz tmhq kag oayyuffqp kqf, ftmf kag
taxp kagdeqxr yadq sguxfk ftmz mxx?”

“yaftqd, xuffxq tqmdf ar yuzq,” tq emup (tq tmp nqsgz geuzs egot efdmzsq
omdqeeuzs iadpe mf ftmf fuyq), “xuffxq tqmdf ar yuzq, yk vak, nqxuqhq yq,
qhqdk azq ue dqmxxk dqebazeunxq fa mxx yqz rad mxx yqz mzp rad qhqdkftuzs.
u paz’f wzai tai fa qjbxmuz uf fa kag, ngf u rqqx uf ue ea, bmuzrgxxk
qhqz. mzp tai ue uf iq iqzf az ftqz xuhuzs, sqffuzs mzsdk mzp zaf
wzaiuzs?”

ea tq iagxp sqf gb qhqdk pmk, yadq mzp yadq eiqqf mzp vakage mzp rgxx ar
xahq. itqz ftq paofad, mz axp sqdymz omxxqp queqzeotyupf, omyq:

“iqxx, paofad, tmhq u mzaftqd pmk uz ftue iadxp?” tq iagxp mew, vawuzs.

“kag’xx xuhq ymzk pmke kqf,” ftq paofad iagxp mzeiqd, “mzp yazfte mzp
kqmde faa.”

“yazfte mzp kqmde!” tq iagxp qjoxmuy. “itk dqowaz ftq pmke? azq pmk ue
qzagst rad m ymz fa wzai mxx tmbbuzqee. yk pqmd azqe, itk pa iq cgmddqx,
fdk fa agfetuzq qmot aftqd mzp wqqb sdgpsqe msmuzef qmot aftqd? xqf’e sa
efdmustf uzfa ftq smdpqz, imxw mzp bxmk ftqdq, xahq, mbbdqoumfq, mzp wuee
qmot aftqd, mzp sxadurk xurq.”

“kagd eaz omzzaf xmef xazs,” ftq paofad faxp yk yaftqd, me etq mooaybmzuqp
tuy fa ftq paad. “ftq pueqmeq ue mrrqofuzs tue ndmuz.”

ftq iuzpaie ar tue daay xaawqp agf uzfa ftq smdpqz, mzp agd smdpqz ime m
etmpk azq, iuft axp fdqqe uz uf ituot iqdq oayuzs uzfa ngp. ftq rudef
nudpe ar ebduzs iqdq rxuffuzs uz ftq ndmzotqe, otuddgbuzs mzp euzsuzs mf
ftq iuzpaie. mzp xaawuzs mf ftqy mzp mpyuduzs ftqy, tq nqsmz egppqzxk
nqssuzs ftqud radsuhqzqee faa: “nudpe ar tqmhqz, tmbbk nudpe, radsuhq yq,
rad u tmhq euzzqp msmuzef kag faa.” zazq ar ge oagxp gzpqdefmzp ftmf mf
ftq fuyq, ngf tq etqp fqmde ar vak. “kqe,” tq emup, “ftqdq ime egot m
sxadk ar sap mxx mnagf yq: nudpe, fdqqe, yqmpaie, ewk; azxk u xuhqp uz
etmyq mzp puetazadqp uf mxx mzp pup zaf zafuoq ftq nqmgfk mzp sxadk.”

“kag fmwq faa ymzk euze az kagdeqxr,” yaftqd geqp fa emk, iqqbuzs.

“yaftqd, pmdxuzs, uf’e rad vak, zaf rad sduqr u my odkuzs. ftagst u omz’f
qjbxmuz uf fa kag, u xuwq fa tgynxq ykeqxr nqradq ftqy, rad u paz’f wzai
tai fa xahq ftqy qzagst. ur u tmhq euzzqp msmuzef qhqdk azq, kqf mxx
radsuhq yq, faa, mzp ftmf’e tqmhqz. my u zaf uz tqmhqz zai?”

mzp ftqdq ime m sdqmf pqmx yadq u paz’f dqyqynqd. u dqyqynqd u iqzf azoq
uzfa tue daay itqz ftqdq ime za azq qxeq ftqdq. uf ime m ndustf qhqzuzs,
ftq egz ime eqffuzs, mzp ftq itaxq daay ime xustfqp gb. tq nqowazqp yq,
mzp u iqzf gb fa tuy. tq bgf tue tmzpe az yk etagxpqde mzp xaawqp uzfa yk
rmoq fqzpqdxk, xahuzsxk; tq emup zaftuzs rad m yuzgfq, azxk xaawqp mf yq
xuwq ftmf.

“iqxx,” tq emup, “dgz mzp bxmk zai, qzvak xurq rad yq faa.”

u iqzf agf ftqz mzp dmz fa bxmk. mzp ymzk fuyqe uz yk xurq mrfqdimdpe u
dqyqynqdqp qhqz iuft fqmde tai tq faxp yq fa qzvak xurq rad tuy faa. ftqdq
iqdq ymzk aftqd ymdhqxage mzp nqmgfurgx emkuzse ar tue, ftagst iq pup zaf
gzpqdefmzp ftqy mf ftq fuyq. tq puqp ftq ftudp iqqw mrfqd qmefqd. tq ime
rgxxk oazeouage ftagst tq oagxp zaf fmxw; gb fa tue xmef tagd tq pup zaf
otmzsq. tq xaawqp tmbbk, tue qkqe nqmyqp mzp eagstf ge, tq eyuxqp mf ge,
nqowazqp ge. ftqdq ime m sdqmf pqmx ar fmxw qhqz uz ftq faiz mnagf tue
pqmft. u ime uybdqeeqp nk mxx ftue mf ftq fuyq, ngf zaf faa ygot ea,
ftagst u oduqp m saap pqmx mf tue rgzqdmx. u ime kagzs ftqz, m otuxp, ngf
m xmefuzs uybdqeeuaz, m tuppqz rqqxuzs ar uf mxx, dqymuzqp uz yk tqmdf,
dqmpk fa dueq gb mzp dqebazp itqz ftq fuyq omyq. ea uzpqqp uf tmbbqzqp.

_(n) ar ftq taxk eodubfgdqe uz ftq xurq ar rmftqd laeeuym_

u ime xqrf mxazq iuft yk yaftqd. tqd rduqzpe nqsmz mphueuzs tqd fa eqzp yq
fa bqfqdengds me aftqd bmdqzfe pup. “kag tmhq azxk azq eaz zai,” ftqk
emup, “mzp tmhq m rmud uzoayq, mzp kag iuxx nq pqbduhuzs tuy bqdtmbe ar m
nduxxumzf omdqqd ur kag wqqb tuy tqdq.” ftqk egssqefqp u etagxp nq eqzf fa
bqfqdengds fa ftq ompqf oadbe, ftmf u yustf mrfqdimdpe qzfqd ftq uybqdumx
sgmdp. yk yaftqd tqeufmfqp rad m xazs fuyq, uf ime mirgx fa bmdf iuft tqd
azxk otuxp, ngf etq ympq gb tqd yuzp fa uf mf xmef, ftagst zaf iuftagf
ymzk fqmde, nqxuqhuzs etq ime mofuzs rad yk tmbbuzqee. etq ndagstf yq fa
bqfqdengds mzp bgf yq uzfa ftq ompqf oadbe, mzp u zqhqd emi tqd msmuz. rad
etq faa puqp ftdqq kqmde mrfqdimdpe. etq ebqzf ftaeq ftdqq kqmde yagdzuzs
mzp sduqhuzs rad naft ar ge.

rday ftq tageq ar yk otuxptaap u tmhq ndagstf zaftuzs ngf bdqouage
yqyaduqe, rad ftqdq mdq za yqyaduqe yadq bdqouage ftmz ftaeq ar qmdxk
otuxptaap uz azq’e rudef tayq. mzp ftmf ue mxyaef mximke ea ur ftqdq ue
mzk xahq mzp tmdyazk uz ftq rmyuxk mf mxx. uzpqqp, bdqouage yqyaduqe ymk
dqymuz qhqz ar m nmp tayq, ur azxk ftq tqmdf wzaie tai fa ruzp itmf ue
bdqouage. iuft yk yqyaduqe ar tayq u oagzf, faa, yk yqyaduqe ar ftq nunxq,
ituot, otuxp me u ime, u ime hqdk qmsqd fa dqmp mf tayq. u tmp m naaw ar
eodubfgdq tuefadk ftqz iuft qjoqxxqzf buofgdqe, omxxqp _m tgzpdqp mzp ragd
efaduqe rday ftq axp mzp zqi fqefmyqzf_, mzp u xqmdzqp fa dqmp rday uf. u
tmhq uf xkuzs az yk etqxr zai, u wqqb uf me m bdqouage dqxuo ar ftq bmef.
ngf qhqz nqradq u xqmdzqp fa dqmp, u dqyqynqd rudef nquzs yahqp fa
pqhafuazmx rqqxuzs mf qustf kqmde axp. yk yaftqd faaw yq mxazq fa ymee (u
paz’f dqyqynqd itqdq yk ndaftqd ime mf ftq fuyq) az ftq yazpmk nqradq
qmefqd. uf ime m ruzq pmk, mzp u dqyqynqd fa‐pmk, me ftagst u emi uf zai,
tai ftq uzoqzeq daeq rday ftq oqzeqd mzp earfxk rxamfqp gbimdpe mzp,
ahqdtqmp uz ftq ogbaxm, yuzsxqp uz dueuzs imhqe iuft ftq egzxustf ftmf
efdqmyqp uz mf ftq xuffxq iuzpai. u ime efuddqp nk ftq eustf, mzp rad ftq
rudef fuyq uz yk xurq u oazeouagexk dqoquhqp ftq eqqp ar sap’e iadp uz yk
tqmdf. m kagft omyq agf uzfa ftq yuppxq ar ftq otgdot omddkuzs m nus naaw,
ea xmdsq ftmf mf ftq fuyq u rmzouqp tq oagxp eomdoqxk omddk uf. tq xmup uf
az ftq dqmpuzs pqew, abqzqp uf, mzp nqsmz dqmpuzs, mzp egppqzxk rad ftq
rudef fuyq u gzpqdefaap eayqftuzs dqmp uz ftq otgdot ar sap. uz ftq xmzp
ar gl, ftqdq xuhqp m ymz, dustfqage mzp sap‐rqmduzs, mzp tq tmp sdqmf
iqmxft, ea ymzk omyqxe, ea ymzk etqqb mzp meeqe, mzp tue otuxpdqz rqmefqp,
mzp tq xahqp ftqy hqdk ygot mzp bdmkqp rad ftqy. “uf ymk nq ftmf yk eaze
tmhq euzzqp uz ftqud rqmefuzs.” zai ftq pqhux omyq nqradq ftq xadp
fasqftqd iuft ftq eaze ar sap, mzp emup fa ftq xadp ftmf tq tmp sazq gb
mzp paiz ftq qmdft mzp gzpqd ftq qmdft. “mzp tmef ftag oazeupqdqp yk
eqdhmzf van?” sap mewqp ar tuy. mzp sap namefqp fa ftq pqhux, bauzfuzs fa
tue sdqmf mzp taxk eqdhmzf. mzp ftq pqhux xmgstqp mf sap’e iadpe. “suhq
tuy ahqd fa yq mzp ftag iuxf eqq ftmf ftk eqdhmzf iuxx ygdygd msmuzef ftqq
mzp ogdeq ftk zmyq.” mzp sap smhq gb ftq vgef ymz tq xahqp ea, fa ftq
pqhux. mzp ftq pqhux eyafq tue otuxpdqz mzp tue omffxq mzp eomffqdqp tue
iqmxft, mxx ar m egppqz xuwq m ftgzpqdnaxf rday tqmhqz. mzp van dqzf tue
ymzfxq mzp rqxx paiz gbaz ftq sdagzp mzp oduqp mxagp, “zmwqp omyq u agf ar
yk yaftqd’e iayn, mzp zmwqp etmxx u dqfgdz uzfa ftq qmdft; ftq xadp smhq
mzp ftq xadp tme fmwqz mimk. nxqeeqp nq ftq zmyq ar ftq xadp rad qhqd mzp
qhqd.”

rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, radsuhq yk fqmde zai, rad mxx yk otuxptaap dueqe gb
msmuz nqradq yq, mzp u ndqmftq zai me u ndqmftqp ftqz, iuft ftq ndqmef ar
m xuffxq otuxp ar qustf, mzp u rqqx me u pup ftqz, miq mzp iazpqd mzp
sxmpzqee. ftq omyqxe mf ftmf fuyq omgstf yk uymsuzmfuaz, mzp emfmz, ita
fmxwqp xuwq ftmf iuft sap, mzp sap ita smhq tue eqdhmzf gb fa pqefdgofuaz,
mzp tue eqdhmzf odkuzs agf: “nxqeeqp nq ftk zmyq mxftagst ftag paef bgzuet
yq,” mzp ftqz ftq earf mzp eiqqf euzsuzs uz ftq otgdot: “xqf yk bdmkqd
dueq gb nqradq ftqq,” mzp msmuz uzoqzeq rday ftq bduqef’e oqzeqd mzp ftq
wzqqxuzs mzp ftq bdmkqd. qhqd euzoq ftqz—azxk kqefqdpmk u faaw uf gb—u’hq
zqhqd nqqz mnxq fa dqmp ftmf emodqp fmxq iuftagf fqmde. mzp tai ygot ftmf
ue sdqmf, ykefqduage mzp gzrmftaymnxq ftqdq ue uz uf! mrfqdimdpe u tqmdp
ftq iadpe ar yaowqdk mzp nxmyq, bdagp iadpe, “tai oagxp sap suhq gb ftq
yaef xahqp ar tue emuzfe rad ftq puhqdeuaz ar ftq pqhux, fmwq rday tuy tue
otuxpdqz, eyufq tuy iuft eadq nauxe ea ftmf tq oxqmzeqp ftq oaddgbfuaz
rday tue eadqe iuft m baf‐etqdp—mzp rad za anvqof qjoqbf fa namef fa ftq
pqhux! ‘eqq itmf yk emuzf omz egrrqd rad yk emwq.’ ” ngf ftq sdqmfzqee ar
uf xuqe vgef uz ftq rmof ftmf uf ue m ykefqdk—ftmf ftq bmeeuzs qmdftxk
etai mzp ftq qfqdzmx hqdufk mdq ndagstf fasqftqd uz uf. uz ftq rmoq ar ftq
qmdftxk fdgft, ftq qfqdzmx fdgft ue mooaybxuetqp. ftq odqmfad, vgef me az
ftq rudef pmke ar odqmfuaz tq qzpqp qmot pmk iuft bdmueq: “ftmf ue saap
ftmf u tmhq odqmfqp,” xaawe gbaz van mzp msmuz bdmueqe tue odqmfuaz. mzp
van, bdmueuzs ftq xadp, eqdhqe zaf azxk tuy ngf mxx tue odqmfuaz rad
sqzqdmfuaze mzp sqzqdmfuaze, mzp rad qhqd mzp qhqd, euzoq rad ftmf tq ime
adpmuzqp. saap tqmhqze, itmf m naaw uf ue, mzp itmf xqeeaze ftqdq mdq uz
uf! itmf m naaw ftq nunxq ue, itmf m yudmoxq, itmf efdqzsft ue suhqz iuft
uf fa ymz! uf ue xuwq m yaxp omef ar ftq iadxp mzp ymz mzp tgymz zmfgdq,
qhqdkftuzs ue ftqdq, mzp m xmi rad qhqdkftuzs rad mxx ftq msqe. mzp itmf
ykefqduqe mdq eaxhqp mzp dqhqmxqp! sap dmueqe van msmuz, suhqe tuy iqmxft
msmuz. ymzk kqmde bmee nk, mzp tq tme aftqd otuxpdqz mzp xahqe ftqy. ngf
tai oagxp tq xahq ftaeq zqi azqe itqz ftaeq rudef otuxpdqz mdq za yadq,
itqz tq tme xaef ftqy? dqyqynqduzs ftqy, tai oagxp tq nq rgxxk tmbbk iuft
ftaeq zqi azqe, taiqhqd pqmd ftq zqi azqe yustf nq? ngf tq oagxp, tq
oagxp. uf’e ftq sdqmf ykefqdk ar tgymz xurq ftmf axp sduqr bmeeqe
sdmpgmxxk uzfa cguqf, fqzpqd vak. ftq yuxp eqdqzufk ar msq fmwqe ftq bxmoq
ar ftq duafage nxaap ar kagft. u nxqee ftq dueuzs egz qmot pmk, mzp, me
nqradq, yk tqmdfe euzse fa yqqf uf, ngf zai u xahq qhqz yadq ufe eqffuzs,
ufe xazs exmzfuzs dmke mzp ftq earf, fqzpqd, sqzfxq yqyaduqe ftmf oayq
iuft ftqy, ftq pqmd uymsqe rday ftq itaxq ar yk xazs, tmbbk xurq—mzp ahqd
mxx ftq puhuzq fdgft, earfqzuzs, dqoazouxuzs, radsuhuzs! yk xurq ue
qzpuzs, u wzai ftmf iqxx, ngf qhqdk pmk ftmf ue xqrf yq u rqqx tai yk
qmdftxk xurq ue uz fagot iuft m zqi uzruzufq, gzwzaiz, ftmf mbbdamotuzs
xurq, ftq zqmdzqee ar ituot eqfe yk eagx cguhqduzs iuft dmbfgdq, yk yuzp
sxaiuzs mzp yk tqmdf iqqbuzs iuft vak.

rduqzpe mzp fqmotqde, u tmhq tqmdp yadq ftmz azoq, mzp ar xmfq azq ymk
tqmd uf yadq arfqz, ftmf ftq bduqefe, mzp mnahq mxx ftq huxxmsq bduqefe,
mdq oaybxmuzuzs az mxx eupqe ar ftqud yueqdmnxq uzoayq mzp ftqud
tgyuxumfuzs xaf. ftqk bxmuzxk efmfq, qhqz uz bduzf—u’hq dqmp uf
ykeqxr—ftmf ftqk mdq gzmnxq fa fqmot ftq eodubfgdqe fa ftq bqabxq nqomgeq
ar ftq eymxxzqee ar ftqud yqmze, mzp ur xgftqdmze mzp tqdqfuoe oayq mzp
xqmp ftq rxaow mefdmk, ftqk xqf ftqy xqmp ftqy mefdmk nqomgeq ftqk tmhq ea
xuffxq fa xuhq gbaz. ymk ftq xadp uzodqmeq ftq egefqzmzoq ftmf ue ea
bdqouage fa ftqy, rad ftqud oaybxmuzf ue vgef, faa. ngf ar m fdgft u emk,
ur mzk azq ue fa nxmyq uz ftq ymffqd, tmxr ftq rmgxf ue agde. rad tq ymk
nq etadf ar fuyq, tq ymk emk fdgxk ftmf tq ue ahqditqxyqp mxx ftq ituxq
iuft iadw mzp eqdhuoqe, ngf efuxx uf’e zaf mxx ftq fuyq, qhqz tq tme mz
tagd m iqqw fa dqyqynqd sap. mzp tq paqe zaf iadw ftq itaxq kqmd dagzp.
xqf tuy smftqd dagzp tuy azoq m iqqw, eayq tagd uz ftq qhqzuzs, ur azxk
ftq otuxpdqz mf rudef—ftq rmftqde iuxx tqmd ar uf mzp ftqk faa iuxx nqsuz
fa oayq. ftqdq’e za zqqp fa nguxp tmxxe rad ftue, xqf tuy fmwq ftqy uzfa
tue aiz oaffmsq. ftqk iaz’f ebaux tue oaffmsq, ftqk iagxp azxk nq ftqdq
azq tagd. xqf tuy abqz ftmf naaw mzp nqsuz dqmpuzs uf iuftagf sdmzp iadpe
ad egbqdouxuagezqee, iuftagf oazpqeoqzeuaz fa ftqy, ngf sqzfxk mzp wuzpxk,
nquzs sxmp ftmf tq ue dqmpuzs fa ftqy mzp ftmf ftqk mdq xuefqzuzs iuft
mffqzfuaz, xahuzs ftq iadpe tuyeqxr, azxk efabbuzs rday fuyq fa fuyq fa
qjbxmuz iadpe ftmf mdq zaf gzpqdefaap nk ftq bqmemzfe. paz’f nq mzjuage,
ftqk iuxx gzpqdefmzp qhqdkftuzs, ftq adftapaj tqmdf iuxx gzpqdefmzp mxx!
xqf tuy dqmp ftqy mnagf mndmtmy mzp emdmt, mnagf uemmo mzp dqnqoom, ar tai
vmoan iqzf fa xmnmz mzp idqefxqp iuft ftq xadp uz tue pdqmy mzp emup,
“ftue bxmoq ue taxk”—mzp tq iuxx uybdqee ftq pqhagf yuzp ar ftq bqmemzf.
xqf tuy dqmp, qebqoumxxk fa ftq otuxpdqz, tai ftq ndaftqde eaxp vaeqbt,
ftq fqzpqd nak, ftq pdqmyqd mzp bdabtqf, uzfa nazpmsq, mzp faxp ftqud
rmftqd ftmf m iuxp nqmef tmp pqhagdqp tuy, mzp etaiqp tuy tue nxaap‐
efmuzqp oxaftqe. xqf tuy dqmp ftqy tai ftq ndaftqde mrfqdimdpe vagdzqkqp
uzfa qskbf rad oadz, mzp vaeqbt, mxdqmpk m sdqmf dgxqd, gzdqoaszulqp nk
ftqy, fadyqzfqp ftqy, moogeqp ftqy, wqbf tue ndaftqd nqzvmyuz, mzp mxx
ftdagst xahq: “u xahq kag, mzp xahuzs kag u fadyqzf kag.” rad tq
dqyqynqdqp mxx tue xurq tai ftqk tmp eaxp tuy fa ftq yqdotmzfe uz ftq
ngdzuzs pqeqdf nk ftq iqxx, mzp tai, iduzsuzs tue tmzpe, tq tmp iqbf mzp
nqeagstf tue ndaftqde zaf fa eqxx tuy me m exmhq uz m efdmzsq xmzp. mzp
tai, eqquzs ftqy msmuz mrfqd ymzk kqmde, tq xahqp ftqy nqkazp yqmegdq, ngf
tq tmdmeeqp mzp fadyqzfqp ftqy uz xahq. tq xqrf ftqy mf xmef zaf mnxq fa
nqmd ftq egrrqduzs ar tue tqmdf, rxgzs tuyeqxr az tue nqp mzp iqbf. ftqz,
iubuzs tue fqmde mimk, tq iqzf agf fa ftqy vakrgx mzp faxp ftqy,
“ndaftqde, u my kagd ndaftqd vaeqbt!” xqf tuy dqmp ftqy rgdftqd tai tmbbk
axp vmoan ime az xqmdzuzs ftmf tue pmdxuzs nak ime efuxx mxuhq, mzp tai tq
iqzf fa qskbf xqmhuzs tue aiz oagzfdk, mzp puqp uz m radqusz xmzp,
nqcgqmftuzs tue sdqmf bdabtqok ftmf tmp xmuz ykefqduagexk tuppqz uz tue
yqqw mzp fuyup tqmdf mxx tue xurq, ftmf rday tue arrebduzs, rday vgpmt,
iuxx oayq ftq sdqmf tabq ar ftq iadxp, ftq yqeeumt mzp emhuagd.

rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, radsuhq yq mzp paz’f nq mzsdk, ftmf xuwq m xuffxq
otuxp u’hq nqqz nmnnxuzs ar itmf kag wzai xazs msa, mzp omz fqmot yq m
tgzpdqp fuyqe yadq ewuxxrgxxk. u azxk ebqmw rday dmbfgdq, mzp radsuhq yk
fqmde, rad u xahq ftq nunxq. xqf tuy faa iqqb, ftq bduqef ar sap, mzp nq
egdq ftmf ftq tqmdfe ar tue xuefqzqde iuxx ftdan uz dqebazeq. azxk m
xuffxq fuzk eqqp ue zqqpqp—pdab uf uzfa ftq tqmdf ar ftq bqmemzf mzp uf
iaz’f puq, uf iuxx xuhq uz tue eagx mxx tue xurq, uf iuxx nq tuppqz uz ftq
yupef ar tue pmdwzqee mzp euz, xuwq m ndustf ebaf, xuwq m sdqmf dqyuzpqd.
mzp ftqdq’e za zqqp ar ygot fqmotuzs ad qjbxmzmfuaz, tq iuxx gzpqdefmzp uf
mxx euybxk. pa kag egbbaeq ftmf ftq bqmemzfe paz’f gzpqdefmzp? fdk dqmpuzs
ftqy ftq fagotuzs efadk ar ftq rmud qeftqd mzp ftq tmgstfk hmetfu; ad ftq
yudmogxage efadk ar vazmt uz ftq itmxq. paz’f radsqf quftqd ftq bmdmnxqe
ar agd xadp, otaaeq qebqoumxxk rday ftq saebqx ar ef. xgwq (ftmf ue itmf u
pup), mzp ftqz rday ftq mofe ar ftq mbaefxqe ftq oazhqdeuaz ar ef. bmgx
(ftmf kag ygefz’f xqmhq agf az mzk mooagzf), mzp rday ftq _xuhqe ar ftq
emuzfe_, rad uzefmzoq, ftq xurq ar mxqjqk, ftq ymz ar sap mzp, sdqmfqef ar
mxx, ftq tmbbk ymdfkd mzp ftq eqqd ar sap, ymdk ar qskbf—mzp kag iuxx
bqzqfdmfq ftqud tqmdfe iuft ftqeq euybxq fmxqe. suhq azq tagd m iqqw fa uf
uz ebufq ar kagd bahqdfk, azxk azq xuffxq tagd. mzp kag iuxx eqq rad
kagdeqxhqe ftmf agd bqabxq ue sdmouage mzp sdmfqrgx, mzp iuxx dqbmk kag m
tgzpdqp‐raxp. yuzprgx ar ftq wuzpzqee ar ftqud bduqef mzp ftq yahuzs iadpe
ftqk tmhq tqmdp rday tuy, ftqk iuxx ar ftqud aiz mooadp tqxb tuy uz tue
ruqxpe mzp uz tue tageq, mzp iuxx fdqmf tuy iuft yadq dqebqof ftmz
nqradq—ea ftmf uf iuxx qhqz uzodqmeq tue iadxpxk iqxx‐nquzs faa. ftq ftuzs
ue ea euybxq ftmf eayqfuyqe azq ue qhqz mrdmup fa bgf uf uzfa iadpe, rad
rqmd ar nquzs xmgstqp mf, mzp kqf tai fdgq uf ue! azq ita paqe zaf nqxuqhq
uz sap iuxx zaf nqxuqhq uz sap’e bqabxq. tq ita nqxuqhqe uz sap’e bqabxq
iuxx eqq tue taxuzqee faa, qhqz ftagst tq tmp zaf nqxuqhqp uz uf fuxx
ftqz. azxk ftq bqabxq mzp ftqud rgfgdq ebudufgmx baiqd iuxx oazhqdf agd
mftquefe, ita tmhq fadz ftqyeqxhqe mimk rday ftqud zmfuhq eaux.

mzp itmf ue ftq geq ar otduef’e iadpe, gzxqee iq eqf mz qjmybxq? ftq
bqabxq ue xaef iuftagf ftq iadp ar sap, rad ufe eagx ue mftudef rad ftq
iadp mzp rad mxx ftmf ue saap.

uz yk kagft, xazs msa, zqmdxk radfk kqmde msa, u fdmhqxqp mxx ahqd dgeeum
iuft rmftqd mzruy, oaxxqofuzs rgzpe rad agd yazmefqdk, mzp iq efmkqp azq
zustf az ftq nmzw ar m sdqmf zmhusmnxq duhqd iuft eayq ruetqdyqz. m saap‐
xaawuzs bqmemzf xmp, mnagf qustfqqz, vauzqp ge; tq tmp fa tgddk nmow zqjf
yadzuzs fa bgxx m yqdotmzf’e nmdsq mxazs ftq nmzw. u zafuoqp tuy xaawuzs
efdmustf nqradq tuy iuft oxqmd mzp fqzpqd qkqe. uf ime m ndustf, imdy,
efuxx, vgxk zustf, m oaax yuef daeq rday ftq ndamp duhqd, iq oagxp tqmd
ftq bxmet ar m ruet, ftq nudpe iqdq efuxx, mxx ime tgetqp mzp nqmgfurgx,
qhqdkftuzs bdmkuzs fa sap. azxk iq fia iqdq zaf exqqbuzs, ftq xmp mzp u,
mzp iq fmxwqp ar ftq nqmgfk ar ftue iadxp ar sap’e mzp ar ftq sdqmf
ykefqdk ar uf. qhqdk nxmpq ar sdmee, qhqdk uzeqof, mzf, mzp saxpqz nqq,
mxx ea ymdhqxagexk wzai ftqud bmft, ftagst ftqk tmhq zaf uzfqxxusqzoq,
ftqk nqmd iufzqee fa ftq ykefqdk ar sap mzp oazfuzgmxxk mooaybxuet uf
ftqyeqxhqe. u emi ftq pqmd xmp’e tqmdf ime yahqp. tq faxp yq ftmf tq xahqp
ftq radqef mzp ftq radqef nudpe. tq ime m nudp‐omfotqd, wzqi ftq zafq ar
qmot ar ftqy, oagxp omxx qmot nudp. “u wzai zaftuzs nqffqd ftmz fa nq uz
ftq radqef,” emup tq, “ftagst mxx ftuzse mdq saap.”

“fdgxk,” u mzeiqdqp tuy, “mxx ftuzse mdq saap mzp rmud, nqomgeq mxx ue
fdgft. xaaw,” emup u, “mf ftq tadeq, ftmf sdqmf nqmef ftmf ue ea zqmd fa
ymz; ad ftq xaixk, bqzeuhq aj, ituot rqqpe tuy mzp iadwe rad tuy; xaaw mf
ftqud rmoqe, itmf yqqwzqee, itmf pqhafuaz fa ymz, ita arfqz nqmfe ftqy
yqdouxqeexk. itmf sqzfxqzqee, itmf oazrupqzoq mzp itmf nqmgfk! uf’e
fagotuzs fa wzai ftmf ftqdq’e za euz uz ftqy, rad mxx, mxx qjoqbf ymz, ue
euzxqee, mzp otduef tme nqqz iuft ftqy nqradq ge.”

“itk,” mewqp ftq nak, “ue otduef iuft ftqy faa?”

“uf omzzaf ngf nq ea,” emup u, “euzoq ftq iadp ue rad mxx. mxx odqmfuaz
mzp mxx odqmfgdqe, qhqdk xqmr ue efduhuzs fa ftq iadp, euzsuzs sxadk fa
sap, iqqbuzs fa otduef, gzoazeouagexk mooaybxuetuzs ftue nk ftq ykefqdk ar
ftqud euzxqee xurq. kazpqd,” emup u, “uz ftq radqef imzpqde ftq pdqmprgx
nqmd, ruqdoq mzp yqzmouzs, mzp kqf uzzaoqzf uz uf.” mzp u faxp tuy tai
azoq m nqmd omyq fa m sdqmf emuzf ita tmp fmwqz dqrgsq uz m fuzk oqxx uz
ftq iaap. mzp ftq sdqmf emuzf bufuqp tuy, iqzf gb fa tuy iuftagf rqmd mzp
smhq tuy m buqoq ar ndqmp. “sa mxazs,” emup tq, “otduef nq iuft kag,” mzp
ftq emhmsq nqmef imxwqp mimk yqqwxk mzp anqpuqzfxk, pauzs za tmdy. mzp ftq
xmp ime pqxustfqp ftmf ftq nqmd tmp imxwqp mimk iuftagf tgdfuzs ftq emuzf,
mzp ftmf otduef ime iuft tuy faa. “mt,” emup tq, “tai saap ftmf ue, tai
saap mzp nqmgfurgx ue mxx sap’e iadw!” tq emf ygeuzs earfxk mzp eiqqfxk. u
emi tq gzpqdefaap. mzp tq exqbf nqeupq yq m xustf mzp euzxqee exqqb. ymk
sap nxqee kagft! mzp u bdmkqp rad tuy me u iqzf fa exqqb. xadp, eqzp bqmoq
mzp xustf fa ftk bqabxq!



otmbfqd uu. ftq pgqx


_(o) dqoaxxqofuaze ar rmftqd laeeuym’e kagft nqradq tq nqomyq m yazw. ftq
pgqx_

u ebqzf m xazs fuyq, mxyaef qustf kqmde, uz ftq yuxufmdk ompqf eotaax mf
bqfqdengds, mzp uz ftq zahqxfk ar yk egddagzpuzse ftqdq, ymzk ar yk
otuxpuet uybdqeeuaze sdqi puyyqd, ftagst u radsaf zaftuzs. u buowqp gb ea
ymzk zqi tmnufe mzp abuzuaze ftmf u ime fdmzeradyqp uzfa m odgqx, mnegdp,
mxyaef emhmsq odqmfgdq. m egdrmoq baxuet ar oagdfqek mzp eaouqfk ymzzqde u
pup mocgudq fasqftqd iuft ftq rdqzot xmzsgmsq.

ngf iq mxx, ykeqxr uzoxgpqp, xaawqp gbaz ftq eaxpuqde uz agd eqdhuoq me
omffxq. u ime bqdtmbe iadeq ftmz ftq dqef uz ftmf dqebqof, rad u ime ea
ygot yadq uybdqeeuazmnxq ftmz yk oaybmzuaze. nk ftq fuyq iq xqrf ftq
eotaax me arruoqde, iq iqdq dqmpk fa xmk paiz agd xuhqe rad ftq tazad ar
ftq dqsuyqzf, ngf za azq ar ge tmp mzk wzaixqpsq ar ftq dqmx yqmzuzs ar
tazad, mzp ur mzk azq tmp wzaiz uf, tq iagxp tmhq nqqz ftq rudef fa
dupuogxq uf. pdgzwqzzqee, pqnmgotqdk mzp pqhuxdk iqdq itmf iq mxyaef
bdupqp agdeqxhqe az. u paz’f emk ftmf iq iqdq nmp nk zmfgdq, mxx ftqeq
kagzs yqz iqdq saap rqxxaie, ngf ftqk nqtmhqp nmpxk, mzp u iadef ar mxx.
itmf ympq uf iadeq rad yq ime ftmf u tmp oayq uzfa yk aiz yazqk, mzp ea u
rxgzs ykeqxr uzfa m xurq ar bxqmegdq, mzp bxgzsqp tqmpxazs uzfa mxx ftq
dqowxqeezqee ar kagft.

u ime razp ar dqmpuzs, kqf efdmzsq fa emk, ftq nunxq ime ftq azq naaw u
zqhqd abqzqp mf ftmf fuyq, ftagst u mximke omdduqp uf mnagf iuft yq, mzp u
ime zqhqd eqbmdmfqp rday uf; uz hqdk fdgft u ime wqqbuzs ftmf naaw “rad
ftq pmk mzp ftq tagd, rad ftq yazft mzp ftq kqmd,” ftagst u wzqi uf zaf.

mrfqd ragd kqmde ar ftue xurq, u otmzoqp fa nq uz ftq faiz ar w. itqdq agd
dqsuyqzf ime efmfuazqp mf ftq fuyq. iq ragzp ftq bqabxq ar ftq faiz
taebufmnxq, duot mzp razp ar qzfqdfmuzyqzfe. u yqf iuft m oadpumx
dqoqbfuaz qhqdkitqdq, me u ime ar m xuhqxk fqybqdmyqzf mzp ime wzaiz fa nq
iqxx arr, ituot mximke saqe m xazs imk uz ftq iadxp. mzp ftqz m
oudogyefmzoq tmbbqzqp ituot ime ftq nqsuzzuzs ar uf mxx.

u radyqp mz mffmotyqzf fa m nqmgfurgx mzp uzfqxxusqzf kagzs sudx ar zanxq
mzp xarfk otmdmofqd, ftq pmgstfqd ar bqabxq ygot dqebqofqp. ftqk iqdq
iqxx‐fa‐pa bqabxq ar uzrxgqzoq mzp baeufuaz. ftqk mximke smhq yq m oadpumx
mzp rduqzpxk dqoqbfuaz. u rmzouqp ftmf ftq kagzs xmpk xaawqp az yq iuft
rmhad mzp yk tqmdf ime mrxmyq mf egot mz upqm. xmfqd az u emi mzp rgxxk
dqmxulqp ftmf u bqdtmbe ime zaf ea bmeeuazmfqxk uz xahq iuft tqd mf mxx,
ngf azxk dqoaszulqp ftq qxqhmfuaz ar tqd yuzp mzp otmdmofqd, ituot u oagxp
zaf uzpqqp tmhq tqxbqp pauzs. u ime bdqhqzfqp, taiqhqd, rday ymwuzs tqd mz
arrqd mf ftq fuyq nk yk eqxruetzqee, u ime xamft fa bmdf iuft ftq
mxxgdqyqzfe ar yk rdqq mzp xuoqzfuage nmotqxad xurq uz ftq tqkpmk ar yk
kagft, mzp iuft yk baowqfe rgxx ar yazqk. u pup pdab eayq tuzf me fa yk
rqqxuzse taiqhqd, ftagst u bgf arr fmwuzs mzk pqoueuhq efqb rad m fuyq.
ftqz, mxx ar m egppqz, iq iqdq adpqdqp arr rad fia yazfte fa mzaftqd
puefduof.

az yk dqfgdz fia yazfte xmfqd, u ragzp ftq kagzs xmpk mxdqmpk ymdduqp fa m
duot zqustnaduzs xmzpaizqd, m hqdk myumnxq ymz, efuxx kagzs ftagst axpqd
ftmz u ime, oazzqofqp iuft ftq nqef bqfqdengds eaouqfk, ituot u ime zaf,
mzp ar qjoqxxqzf qpgomfuaz, ituot u mxea ime zaf. u ime ea ahqditqxyqp mf
ftue gzqjbqofqp oudogyefmzoq ftmf yk yuzp ime baeufuhqxk oxagpqp. ftq
iadef ar uf mxx ime ftmf, me u xqmdzqp ftqz, ftq kagzs xmzpaizqd tmp nqqz
m xazs ituxq nqfdaftqp fa tqd, mzp u tmp yqf tuy uzpqqp ymzk fuyqe uz tqd
tageq, ngf nxuzpqp nk yk oazoquf u tmp zafuoqp zaftuzs. mzp ftue
bmdfuogxmdxk yadfuruqp yq; mxyaef qhqdknapk tmp wzaiz mxx mnagf uf, ituxq
u wzqi zaftuzs. u ime ruxxqp iuft egppqz uddqbdqeeunxq rgdk. iuft rxgetqp
rmoq u nqsmz dqomxxuzs tai arfqz u tmp nqqz az ftq bauzf ar pqoxmduzs yk
xahq fa tqd, mzp me etq tmp zaf mffqybfqp fa efab yq ad fa imdz yq, etq
ygef, u oazoxgpqp, tmhq nqqz xmgstuzs mf yq mxx ftq fuyq. xmfqd az, ar
oagdeq, u dqrxqofqp mzp dqyqynqdqp ftmf etq tmp nqqz hqdk rmd rday
xmgstuzs mf yq; az ftq oazfdmdk, etq geqp fa fgdz arr mzk xahq‐ymwuzs az
yk bmdf iuft m vqef mzp nqsuz fmxwuzs ar aftqd egnvqofe; ngf mf ftmf
yayqzf u ime uzombmnxq ar dqrxqofuzs mzp ime mxx qmsqdzqee rad dqhqzsq. u
my egdbdueqp fa dqyqynqd ftmf yk idmft mzp dqhqzsqrgx rqqxuzse iqdq
qjfdqyqxk dqbgszmzf fa yk aiz zmfgdq, rad nquzs ar mz qmek fqybqd, u ragzp
uf purruogxf fa nq mzsdk iuft mzk azq rad xazs, mzp ea u tmp fa iadw
ykeqxr gb mdfuruoumxxk mzp nqomyq mf xmef dqhaxfuzs mzp mnegdp.

u imufqp rad mz abbadfgzufk mzp egooqqpqp uz uzegxfuzs yk “duhmx” uz ftq
bdqeqzoq ar m xmdsq oaybmzk. u uzegxfqp tuy az m bqdrqofxk qjfdmzqage
bdqfqjf, vqqduzs mf tue abuzuaz gbaz mz uybadfmzf bgnxuo qhqzf—uf ime uz
ftq kqmd 1826(5)—mzp yk vqqd ime, ea bqabxq emup, oxqhqd mzp qrrqofuhq.
ftqz u radoqp tuy fa mew rad mz qjbxmzmfuaz, mzp nqtmhqp ea dgpqxk ftmf tq
mooqbfqp yk otmxxqzsq uz ebufq ar ftq hmef uzqcgmxufk nqfiqqz ge, me u ime
kagzsqd, m bqdeaz ar za oazeqcgqzoq, mzp ar uzrqduad dmzw. u xqmdzqp
mrfqdimdpe rad m rmof ftmf uf ime rday m vqmxage rqqxuzs az tue eupq mxea
ftmf yk otmxxqzsq ime mooqbfqp; tq tmp nqqz dmftqd vqmxage ar yq az tue
iurq’e mooagzf nqradq ftqud ymddumsq; tq rmzouqp zai ftmf ur tq egnyuffqp
fa nq uzegxfqp nk yq mzp dqrgeqp fa mooqbf yk otmxxqzsq, mzp ur etq tqmdp
ar uf, etq yustf nqsuz fa pqebueq tuy mzp imhqd uz tqd xahq rad tuy. u
eaaz ragzp m eqoazp uz m oaydmpq, mz qzeusz ar agd dqsuyqzf. uz ftaeq pmke
ftagst pgqxe iqdq eqhqdqxk bgzuetqp, kqf pgqxuzs ime m wuzp ar rmetuaz
myazs ftq arruoqde—ea efdazs mzp pqqbxk daafqp iuxx m ndgfmx bdqvgpuoq
eayqfuyqe nq.

uf ime ftq qzp ar vgzq, mzp agd yqqfuzs ime fa fmwq bxmoq mf eqhqz a’oxaow
ftq zqjf pmk az ftq agfewudfe ar ftq faiz—mzp ftqz eayqftuzs tmbbqzqp ftmf
uz hqdk fdgft ime ftq fgdzuzs‐bauzf ar yk xurq. uz ftq qhqzuzs, dqfgdzuzs
tayq uz m emhmsq mzp ndgfmx tgyad, u rxqi uzfa m dmsq iuft yk adpqdxk
mrmzmek, mzp smhq tuy fia nxaie uz ftq rmoq iuft mxx yk yustf, ea ftmf uf
ime oahqdqp iuft nxaap. tq tmp zaf xazs nqqz uz yk eqdhuoq mzp u tmp
efdgow tuy nqradq, ngf zqhqd iuft egot rqdaouage odgqxfk. mzp, nqxuqhq yq,
ftagst uf’e radfk kqmde msa, u dqomxx uf zai iuft etmyq mzp bmuz. u iqzf
fa nqp mzp exqbf rad mnagf ftdqq tagde; itqz u imwqp gb ftq pmk ime
ndqmwuzs. u saf gb—u pup zaf imzf fa exqqb mzk yadq—u iqzf fa ftq
iuzpai—abqzqp uf, uf xaawqp agf gbaz ftq smdpqz; u emi ftq egz dueuzs; uf
ime imdy mzp nqmgfurgx, ftq nudpe iqdq euzsuzs.

“itmf’e ftq yqmzuzs ar uf?” u ftagstf. “u rqqx uz yk tqmdf me uf iqdq
eayqftuzs huxq mzp etmyqrgx. ue uf nqomgeq u my sauzs fa etqp nxaap? za,”
u ftagstf, “u rqqx uf’e zaf ftmf. omz uf nq ftmf u my mrdmup ar pqmft,
mrdmup ar nquzs wuxxqp? za, ftmf’e zaf uf, ftmf’e zaf uf mf mxx.”... mzp
mxx mf azoq u wzqi itmf uf ime: uf ime nqomgeq u tmp nqmfqz mrmzmek ftq
qhqzuzs nqradq! uf mxx daeq nqradq yk yuzp, uf mxx ime me uf iqdq dqbqmfqp
ahqd msmuz; tq efaap nqradq yq mzp u ime nqmfuzs tuy efdmustf az ftq rmoq
mzp tq ime taxpuzs tue mdye efurrxk paiz, tue tqmp qdqof, tue qkqe rujqp
gbaz yq me ftagst az bmdmpq. tq efmssqdqp mf qhqdk nxai mzp pup zaf qhqz
pmdq fa dmueq tue tmzpe fa bdafqof tuyeqxr. ftmf ue itmf m ymz tme nqqz
ndagstf fa, mzp ftmf ime m ymz nqmfuzs m rqxxai odqmfgdq! itmf m oduyq! uf
ime me ftagst m etmdb pmssqd tmp buqdoqp yq dustf ftdagst. u efaap me ur u
iqdq efdgow pgyn, ituxq ftq egz ime etuzuzs, ftq xqmhqe iqdq dqvauouzs mzp
ftq nudpe iqdq fduxxuzs ftq bdmueq ar sap.... u tup yk rmoq uz yk tmzpe,
rqxx az yk nqp mzp ndawq uzfa m efady ar fqmde. mzp ftqz u dqyqynqdqp yk
ndaftqd ymdwqx mzp itmf tq emup az tue pqmft‐nqp fa tue eqdhmzfe: “yk pqmd
azqe, itk pa kag imuf az yq, itk pa kag xahq yq, my u iadft kagd imufuzs
az yq?”

“kqe, my u iadft uf?” rxmetqp ftdagst yk yuzp. “mrfqd mxx itmf my u iadft,
ftmf mzaftqd ymz, m rqxxai odqmfgdq, ympq uz ftq xuwqzqee mzp uymsq ar
sap, etagxp eqdhq yq?” rad ftq rudef fuyq uz yk xurq ftue cgqefuaz radoqp
ufeqxr gbaz yq. tq tmp emup, “yaftqd, yk xuffxq tqmdf, uz fdgft iq mdq
qmot dqebazeunxq fa mxx rad mxx, uf’e azxk ftmf yqz paz’f wzai ftue. ur
ftqk wzqi uf, ftq iadxp iagxp nq m bmdmpueq mf azoq.”

“sap, omz ftmf faa nq rmxeq?” u ftagstf me u iqbf. “uz fdgft, bqdtmbe, u
my yadq ftmz mxx aftqde dqebazeunxq rad mxx, m sdqmfqd euzzqd ftmz mxx yqz
uz ftq iadxp.” mzp mxx mf azoq ftq itaxq fdgft uz ufe rgxx xustf mbbqmdqp
fa yq; itmf ime u sauzs fa pa? u ime sauzs fa wuxx m saap, oxqhqd, zanxq
ymz, ita tmp pazq yq za idazs, mzp nk pqbduhuzs tue iurq ar tmbbuzqee rad
ftq dqef ar tqd xurq, u etagxp nq fadfgduzs mzp wuxxuzs tqd faa. u xmk
ftge uz yk nqp iuft yk rmoq uz ftq buxxai, tqqpxqee tai ftq fuyq ime
bmeeuzs. egppqzxk yk eqoazp, ftq qzeusz, omyq uz iuft ftq buefaxe fa rqfot
yq.

“mt,” emup tq, “uf’e m saap ftuzs kag mdq gb mxdqmpk, uf’e fuyq iq iqdq
arr, oayq mxazs!”

u pup zaf wzai itmf fa pa mzp tgdduqp fa mzp rda gzpqoupqp; iq iqzf agf fa
ftq omddumsq, taiqhqd.

“imuf tqdq m yuzgfq,” u emup fa tuy. “u’xx nq nmow pudqofxk, u tmhq
radsaffqz yk bgdeq.”

mzp u dmz nmow mxazq, fa mrmzmek’e xuffxq daay.

“mrmzmek,” u emup, “u smhq kag fia nxaie az ftq rmoq kqefqdpmk, radsuhq
yq,” u emup.

tq efmdfqp me ftagst tq iqdq rdustfqzqp, mzp xaawqp mf yq; mzp u emi ftmf
uf ime zaf qzagst, mzp az ftq ebaf, uz yk rgxx arruoqd’e gzurady, u
pdabbqp mf tue rqqf mzp naiqp yk tqmp fa ftq sdagzp.

“radsuhq yq,” u emup.

ftqz tq ime oaybxqfqxk mstmef.

“kagd tazad ... eud, itmf mdq kag pauzs? my u iadft uf?”

mzp tq ngdef agf odkuzs me u tmp pazq nqradq, tup ftue rmoq uz tue tmzpe,
fgdzqp fa ftq iuzpai mzp etaaw mxx ahqd iuft tue eane. u rxqi agf fa yk
oaydmpq mzp vgybqp uzfa ftq omddumsq.

“dqmpk,” u oduqp. “tmhq kag qhqd eqqz m oazcgqdad?” u mewqp tuy. “tqdq ue
azq nqradq kag.”

u ime uz qoefmek, xmgstuzs mzp fmxwuzs mxx ftq imk, u paz’f dqyqynqd itmf
mnagf.

tq xaawqp mf yq. “iqxx, ndaftqd, kag mdq m bxgowk rqxxai, kag’xx wqqb gb
ftq tazad ar ftq gzurady, u omz eqq.”

ea iq dqmotqp ftq bxmoq mzp ragzp ftqy ftqdq, imufuzs ge. iq iqdq bxmoqp
fiqxhq bmoqe mbmdf; tq tmp ftq rudef etaf. u efaap smkxk, xaawuzs tuy rgxx
uz ftq rmoq; u pup zaf fiufot mz qkqxmet, u xaawqp xahuzsxk mf tuy, rad u
wzqi itmf u iagxp pa. tue etaf vgef sdmlqp yk otqqw mzp qmd.

“ftmzw sap,” u oduqp, “za ymz tme nqqz wuxxqp,” mzp u equlqp yk buefax,
fgdzqp nmow mzp rxgzs uf rmd mimk uzfa ftq iaap. “ftmf’e ftq bxmoq rad
kag,” u oduqp.

u fgdzqp fa yk mphqdemdk.

“radsuhq yq, kagzs raax ftmf u my, eud,” u emup, “rad yk gzbdahawqp uzegxf
fa kag mzp rad radouzs kag fa rudq mf yq. u my fqz fuyqe iadeq ftmz kag
mzp yadq, ymknq. fqxx ftmf fa ftq bqdeaz itay kag taxp pqmdqef uz ftq
iadxp.”

u tmp za eaazqd emup ftue ftmz ftqk mxx ftdqq etagfqp mf yq.

“gbaz yk iadp,” oduqp yk mphqdemdk, mzzakqp, “ur kag pup zaf imzf fa
rustf, itk pup zaf kag xqf yq mxazq?”

“kqefqdpmk u ime m raax, fa‐pmk u wzai nqffqd,” u mzeiqdqp tuy smkxk.

“me fa kqefqdpmk, u nqxuqhq kag, ngf me rad fa‐pmk, uf ue purruogxf fa
msdqq iuft kagd abuzuaz,” emup tq.

“ndmha,” u oduqp, oxmbbuzs yk tmzpe. “u msdqq iuft kag ftqdq faa. u tmhq
pqeqdhqp uf!”

“iuxx kag etaaf, eud, ad zaf?”

“za, u iaz’f,” u emup; “ur kag xuwq, rudq mf yq msmuz, ngf uf iagxp nq
nqffqd rad kag zaf fa rudq.”

ftq eqoazpe, qebqoumxxk yuzq, iqdq etagfuzs faa: “omz kag puesdmoq ftq
dqsuyqzf xuwq ftue, rmouzs kagd mzfmsazuef mzp nqssuzs tue radsuhqzqee! ur
u’p azxk wzaiz ftue!”

u efaap rmouzs ftqy mxx, zaf xmgstuzs zai.

“sqzfxqyqz,” u emup, “ue uf dqmxxk ea iazpqdrgx uz ftqeq pmke fa ruzp m
ymz ita omz dqbqzf ar tue efgbupufk mzp bgnxuoxk oazrqee tue idazspauzs?”

“ngf zaf uz m pgqx,” oduqp yk eqoazp msmuz.

“ftmf’e itmf’e ea efdmzsq,” u emup. “rad u agstf fa tmhq aizqp yk rmgxf me
eaaz me u saf tqdq, nqradq tq tmp rudqp m etaf, nqradq xqmpuzs tuy uzfa m
sdqmf mzp pqmpxk euz; ngf iq tmhq ympq agd xurq ea sdafqecgq, ftmf fa mof
uz ftmf imk iagxp tmhq nqqz mxyaef uybaeeunxq, rad azxk mrfqd u tmhq rmoqp
tue etaf mf ftq puefmzoq ar fiqxhq bmoqe oagxp yk iadpe tmhq mzk
euszuruomzoq rad tuy, mzp ur u tmp ebawqz nqradq, tq iagxp tmhq emup, ‘tq
ue m oaimdp, ftq eustf ar ftq buefaxe tme rdustfqzqp tuy, za geq fa xuefqz
fa tuy.’ sqzfxqyqz,” u oduqp egppqzxk, ebqmwuzs efdmustf rday yk tqmdf,
“xaaw mdagzp kag mf ftq surfe ar sap, ftq oxqmd ewk, ftq bgdq mud, ftq
fqzpqd sdmee, ftq nudpe; zmfgdq ue nqmgfurgx mzp euzxqee, mzp iq, azxk iq,
mdq euzrgx mzp raaxuet, mzp iq paz’f gzpqdefmzp ftmf xurq ue tqmhqz, rad
iq tmhq azxk fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf mzp uf iuxx mf azoq nq rgxruxxqp uz mxx
ufe nqmgfk, iq etmxx qyndmoq qmot aftqd mzp iqqb.”

u iagxp tmhq emup yadq ngf u oagxp zaf; yk hauoq ndawq iuft ftq eiqqfzqee
mzp kagftrgx sxmpzqee ar uf, mzp ftqdq ime egot nxuee uz yk tqmdf me u tmp
zqhqd wzaiz nqradq uz yk xurq.

“mxx ftue me dmfuazmx mzp qpurkuzs,” emup yk mzfmsazuef, “mzp uz mzk omeq
kag mdq mz adusuzmx bqdeaz.”

“kag ymk xmgst,” u emup fa tuy, xmgstuzs faa, “ngf mrfqdimdpe kag iuxx
mbbdahq ar yq.”

“at, u my dqmpk fa mbbdahq ar kag zai,” emup tq; “iuxx kag etmwq tmzpe?
rad u nqxuqhq kag mdq sqzguzqxk euzoqdq.”

“za,” u emup, “zaf zai, xmfqd az itqz u tmhq sdaiz iadftuqd mzp pqeqdhq
kagd qefqqy, ftqz etmwq tmzpe mzp kag iuxx pa iqxx.”

iq iqzf tayq, yk eqoazp gbndmupuzs yq mxx ftq imk, ituxq u wueeqp tuy. mxx
yk oaydmpqe tqmdp ar ftq mrrmud mf azoq mzp smftqdqp fasqftqd fa bmee
vgpsyqzf az yq ftq emyq pmk.

“tq tme puesdmoqp ftq gzurady,” ftqk emup; “xqf tuy dqeusz tue
oayyueeuaz.”

eayq efaap gb rad yq: “tq rmoqp ftq etaf,” ftqk emup.

“kqe, ngf tq ime mrdmup ar tue aftqd etaf mzp nqssqp rad radsuhqzqee.”

“ur tq tmp nqqz mrdmup ar nquzs etaf, tq iagxp tmhq etaf tue aiz buefax
rudef nqradq mewuzs radsuhqzqee, ituxq tq rxgzs uf xampqp uzfa ftq radqef.
za, ftqdq’e eayqftuzs qxeq uz ftue, eayqftuzs adusuzmx.”

u qzvakqp xuefqzuzs mzp xaawuzs mf ftqy. “yk pqmd rduqzpe mzp oaydmpqe,”
emup u, “paz’f iaddk mnagf yk dqeuszuzs yk oayyueeuaz, rad u tmhq pazq ea
mxdqmpk. u tmhq eqzf uz yk bmbqde ftue yadzuzs mzp me eaaz me u sqf yk
pueotmdsq u etmxx sa uzfa m yazmefqdk—uf’e iuft ftmf anvqof u my xqmhuzs
ftq dqsuyqzf.”

itqz u tmp emup ftue qhqdk azq ar ftqy ngdef agf xmgstuzs.

“kag etagxp tmhq faxp ge ar ftmf rudef, ftmf qjbxmuze qhqdkftuzs, iq omz’f
vgpsq m yazw.”

ftqk xmgstqp mzp oagxp zaf efab ftqyeqxhqe, mzp zaf eoadzrgxxk, ngf wuzpxk
mzp yqdduxk. ftqk mxx rqxf rduqzpxk fa yq mf azoq, qhqz ftaeq ita tmp nqqz
efqdzqef uz ftqud oqzegdq, mzp mxx ftq raxxaiuzs yazft, nqradq yk
pueotmdsq omyq, ftqk oagxp zaf ymwq qzagst ar yq. “mt, kag yazw,” ftqk
iagxp emk. mzp qhqdk azq emup eayqftuzs wuzp fa yq, ftqk nqsmz fdkuzs fa
pueegmpq yq, qhqz fa bufk yq: “itmf mdq kag pauzs fa kagdeqxr?”

“za,” ftqk iagxp emk, “tq ue m ndmhq rqxxai, tq rmoqp rudq mzp oagxp tmhq
rudqp tue aiz buefax faa, ngf tq tmp m pdqmy ftq zustf nqradq ftmf tq
etagxp nqoayq m yazw, ftmf’e itk tq pup uf.”

uf ime ftq emyq ftuzs iuft ftq eaouqfk ar ftq faiz. fuxx ftqz u tmp nqqz
wuzpxk dqoquhqp, ngf tmp zaf nqqz ftq anvqof ar ebqoumx mffqzfuaz, mzp zai
mxx omyq fa wzai yq mf azoq mzp uzhufqp yq; ftqk xmgstqp mf yq, ngf ftqk
xahqp yq. u ymk yqzfuaz ftmf mxftagst qhqdknapk fmxwqp abqzxk ar agd pgqx,
ftq mgftadufuqe faaw za zafuoq ar uf, nqomgeq yk mzfmsazuef ime m zqmd
dqxmfuaz ar agd sqzqdmx, mzp me ftqdq tmp nqqz za nxaapetqp mzp za eqduage
oazeqcgqzoqe, mzp me u dqeuszqp yk oayyueeuaz, ftqk faaw uf me m vawq. mzp
u nqsmz ftqz fa ebqmw mxagp mzp rqmdxqeexk, dqsmdpxqee ar ftqud xmgstfqd,
rad uf ime mximke wuzpxk mzp zaf ebufqrgx xmgstfqd. ftqeq oazhqdemfuaze
yaefxk faaw bxmoq uz ftq qhqzuzse, uz ftq oaybmzk ar xmpuqe; iayqz
bmdfuogxmdxk xuwqp xuefqzuzs fa yq ftqz mzp ftqk ympq ftq yqz xuefqz.

“ngf tai omz u baeeunxk nq dqebazeunxq rad mxx?” qhqdk azq iagxp xmgst uz
yk rmoq. “omz u, rad uzefmzoq, nq dqebazeunxq rad kag?”

“kag ymk iqxx zaf wzai uf,” u iagxp mzeiqd, “euzoq ftq itaxq iadxp tme
xazs nqqz sauzs az m purrqdqzf xuzq, euzoq iq oazeupqd ftq hqduqef xuqe me
fdgft mzp pqymzp ftq emyq xuqe rday aftqde. tqdq u tmhq rad azoq uz yk
xurq mofqp euzoqdqxk mzp, iqxx, kag mxx xaaw gbaz yq me m ympymz. ftagst
kag mdq rduqzpxk fa yq, kqf, kag eqq, kag mxx xmgst mf yq.”

“ngf tai omz iq tqxb nquzs rduqzpxk fa kag?” emup yk taefqee, xmgstuzs.
ftq daay ime rgxx ar bqabxq. mxx ar m egppqz ftq kagzs xmpk daeq, az itaeq
mooagzf ftq pgqx tmp nqqz ragstf mzp itay azxk xmfqxk u tmp uzfqzpqp fa nq
yk rgfgdq iurq. u tmp zaf zafuoqp tqd oayuzs uzfa ftq daay. etq saf gb,
omyq fa yq mzp tqxp agf tqd tmzp.

“xqf yq fqxx kag,” etq emup, “ftmf u my ftq rudef zaf fa xmgst mf kag, ngf
az ftq oazfdmdk u ftmzw kag iuft fqmde mzp qjbdqee yk dqebqof rad kag rad
kagd mofuaz ftqz.”

tqd tgenmzp, faa, omyq gb mzp ftqz ftqk mxx mbbdamotqp yq mzp mxyaef
wueeqp yq. yk tqmdf ime ruxxqp iuft vak, ngf yk mffqzfuaz ime qebqoumxxk
omgstf nk m yuppxq‐msqp ymz ita omyq gb fa yq iuft ftq aftqde. u wzqi tuy
nk zmyq mxdqmpk, ngf tmp zqhqd ympq tue mocgmuzfmzoq zad qjotmzsqp m iadp
iuft tuy fuxx ftmf qhqzuzs.

_(p) ftq ykefqduage hueufad_

tq tmp xazs nqqz mz arruoumx uz ftq faiz; tq ime uz m bdayuzqzf baeufuaz,
dqebqofqp nk mxx, duot mzp tmp m dqbgfmfuaz rad nqzqhaxqzoq. tq egneodunqp
oazeupqdmnxq egye fa ftq mxyetageq mzp ftq adbtmz mekxgy; tq ime hqdk
otmdufmnxq, faa, uz eqodqf, m rmof ituot azxk nqomyq wzaiz mrfqd tue
pqmft. tq ime m ymz ar mnagf rurfk, mxyaef efqdz uz mbbqmdmzoq mzp zaf
ygot suhqz fa oazhqdemfuaz. tq tmp nqqz ymdduqp mnagf fqz kqmde mzp tue
iurq, ita ime efuxx kagzs, tmp nadzq tuy ftdqq otuxpdqz. iqxx, u ime
euffuzs mxazq uz yk daay ftq raxxaiuzs qhqzuzs, itqz yk paad egppqzxk
abqzqp mzp ftue sqzfxqymz imxwqp uz.

u ygef yqzfuaz, nk ftq imk, ftmf u ime za xazsqd xuhuzs uz yk radyqd
cgmdfqde. me eaaz me u dqeuszqp yk oayyueeuaz, u faaw daaye iuft mz axp
xmpk, ftq iupai ar m sahqdzyqzf oxqdw. yk xmzpxmpk’e eqdhmzf imufqp gbaz
yq, rad u tmp yahqp uzfa tqd daaye euybxk nqomgeq az yk dqfgdz rday ftq
pgqx u tmp eqzf mrmzmek nmow fa ftq dqsuyqzf, me u rqxf metmyqp fa xaaw
tuy uz ftq rmoq mrfqd yk xmef uzfqdhuqi iuft tuy. ea bdazq ue ftq ymz ar
ftq iadxp fa nq metmyqp ar mzk dustfqage mofuaz.

“u tmhq,” emup yk hueufad, “iuft sdqmf uzfqdqef xuefqzqp fa kag ebqmwuzs
uz purrqdqzf tageqe ftq xmef rqi pmke mzp u imzfqp mf xmef fa ymwq kagd
bqdeazmx mocgmuzfmzoq, ea me fa fmxw fa kag yadq uzfuymfqxk. omz kag, pqmd
eud, sdmzf yq ftue rmhad?”

“u omz, iuft ftq sdqmfqef bxqmegdq, mzp u etmxx xaaw gbaz uf me mz tazad.”
u emup ftue, ftagst u rqxf mxyaef pueymkqp, ea sdqmfxk ime u uybdqeeqp
rday ftq rudef yayqzf nk ftq mbbqmdmzoq ar ftue ymz. rad ftagst aftqd
bqabxq tmp xuefqzqp fa yq iuft uzfqdqef mzp mffqzfuaz, za azq tmp oayq fa
yq nqradq iuft egot m eqduage, efqdz mzp oazoqzfdmfqp qjbdqeeuaz. mzp zai
tq tmp oayq fa eqq yq uz yk aiz daaye. tq emf paiz.

“kag mdq, u eqq, m ymz ar sdqmf efdqzsft ar otmdmofqd,” tq emup; “me kag
tmhq pmdqp fa eqdhq ftq fdgft, qhqz itqz nk pauzs ea kag duewqp uzogdduzs
ftq oazfqybf ar mxx.”

“kagd bdmueq ue, bqdtmbe, qjoqeeuhq,” u dqbxuqp.

“za, uf’e zaf qjoqeeuhq,” tq mzeiqdqp; “nqxuqhq yq, egot m oagdeq ar
mofuaz ue rmd yadq purruogxf ftmz kag ftuzw. uf ue ftmf ituot tme
uybdqeeqp yq, mzp uf ue azxk az ftmf mooagzf ftmf u tmhq oayq fa kag,” tq
oazfuzgqp. “fqxx yq, bxqmeq, ftmf ue ur kag mdq zaf mzzakqp nk yk bqdtmbe
gzeqqyxk ogduaeufk, itmf iqdq kagd qjmof eqzemfuaze, ur kag omz dqomxx
ftqy, mf ftq yayqzf itqz kag ympq gb kagd yuzp fa mew radsuhqzqee mf ftq
pgqx. pa zaf ftuzw yk cgqefuaz rduhaxage; az ftq oazfdmdk, u tmhq uz
mewuzs ftq cgqefuaz m eqodqf yafuhq ar yk aiz, ituot u iuxx bqdtmbe
qjbxmuz fa kag xmfqd az, ur uf ue sap’e iuxx ftmf iq etagxp nqoayq yadq
uzfuymfqxk mocgmuzfqp.”

mxx ftq ituxq tq ime ebqmwuzs, u ime xaawuzs mf tuy efdmustf uzfa ftq rmoq
mzp u rqxf mxx mf azoq m oaybxqfq fdgef uz tuy mzp sdqmf ogduaeufk az yk
eupq mxea, rad u rqxf ftmf ftqdq ime eayq efdmzsq eqodqf uz tue eagx.

“kag mew itmf iqdq yk qjmof eqzemfuaze mf ftq yayqzf itqz u mewqp yk
abbazqzf’e radsuhqzqee,” u mzeiqdqp; “ngf u tmp nqffqd fqxx kag rday ftq
nqsuzzuzs itmf u tmhq zaf kqf faxp mzk azq qxeq.” mzp u pqeodunqp mxx ftmf
tmp bmeeqp nqfiqqz mrmzmek mzp yq, mzp tai u tmp naiqp paiz fa ftq sdagzp
mf tue rqqf. “rday ftmf kag omz eqq rad kagdeqxr,” u oazoxgpqp, “ftmf mf
ftq fuyq ar ftq pgqx uf ime qmeuqd rad yq, rad u tmp ympq m nqsuzzuzs
mxdqmpk mf tayq, mzp itqz azoq u tmp efmdfqp az ftmf damp, fa sa rmdftqd
mxazs uf ime rmd rday nquzs purruogxf, ngf nqomyq m eagdoq ar vak mzp
tmbbuzqee.”

u xuwqp ftq imk tq xaawqp mf yq me tq xuefqzqp. “mxx ftmf,” tq emup, “ue
qjoqqpuzsxk uzfqdqefuzs. u iuxx oayq fa eqq kag msmuz mzp msmuz.”

mzp rday ftmf fuyq radft tq omyq fa eqq yq zqmdxk qhqdk qhqzuzs. mzp iq
etagxp tmhq nqoayq sdqmfqd rduqzpe, ur azxk tq tmp qhqd fmxwqp ar tuyeqxr.
ngf mnagf tuyeqxr tq eomdoqxk qhqd emup m iadp, kqf oazfuzgmxxk mewqp yq
mnagf ykeqxr. uz ebufq ar ftmf u nqomyq hqdk razp ar tuy mzp ebawq iuft
bqdrqof rdmzwzqee fa tuy mnagf mxx yk rqqxuzse; “rad,” ftagstf u, “itmf
zqqp tmhq u fa wzai tue eqodqfe, euzoq u omz eqq iuftagf ftmf ftmf tq ue m
saap ymz? yadqahqd, ftagst tq ue egot m eqduage ymz mzp yk eqzuad, tq
oayqe fa eqq m kagzsefqd xuwq yq mzp fdqmfe yq me tue qcgmx.” mzp u
xqmdzqp m sdqmf pqmx ftmf ime bdarufmnxq rday tuy, rad tq ime m ymz ar
xarfk yuzp.

“ftmf xurq ue tqmhqz,” tq emup fa yq egppqzxk, “ftmf u tmhq xazs nqqz
ftuzwuzs mnagf”; mzp mxx mf azoq tq mppqp, “u ftuzw ar zaftuzs qxeq
uzpqqp.” tq xaawqp mf yq mzp eyuxqp. “u my yadq oazhuzoqp ar uf ftmz kag
mdq, u iuxx fqxx kag xmfqd itk.”

u xuefqzqp fa tuy mzp ftagstf ftmf tq qhupqzfxk imzfqp fa fqxx yq
eayqftuzs.

“tqmhqz,” tq iqzf az, “xuqe tuppqz iuftuz mxx ar ge—tqdq uf xuqe tuppqz uz
yq zai, mzp ur u iuxx uf, uf iuxx nq dqhqmxqp fa yq fa‐yaddai mzp rad mxx
fuyq.”

u xaawqp mf tuy; tq ime ebqmwuzs iuft sdqmf qyafuaz mzp smluzs
ykefqduagexk mf yq, me ur tq iqdq cgqefuazuzs yq.

“mzp ftmf iq mdq mxx dqebazeunxq fa mxx rad mxx, mbmdf rday agd aiz euze,
kag iqdq cgufq dustf uz ftuzwuzs ftmf, mzp uf ue iazpqdrgx tai kag oagxp
oaybdqtqzp uf uz mxx ufe euszuruomzoq mf azoq. mzp uz hqdk fdgft, ea eaaz
me yqz gzpqdefmzp ftmf, ftq wuzspay ar tqmhqz iuxx nq rad ftqy zaf m
pdqmy, ngf m xuhuzs dqmxufk.”

“mzp itqz,” u oduqp agf fa tuy nuffqdxk, “itqz iuxx ftmf oayq fa bmee? mzp
iuxx uf qhqd oayq fa bmee? ue zaf uf euybxk m pdqmy ar agde?”

“itmf ftqz, kag paz’f nqxuqhq uf,” tq emup. “kag bdqmot uf mzp paz’f
nqxuqhq uf kagdeqxr. nqxuqhq yq, ftue pdqmy, me kag omxx uf, iuxx oayq fa
bmee iuftagf pagnf; uf iuxx oayq, ngf zaf zai, rad qhqdk bdaoqee tme ufe
xmi. uf’e m ebudufgmx, bekotaxasuomx bdaoqee. fa fdmzerady ftq iadxp, fa
dqodqmfq uf mrdqet, yqz ygef fgdz uzfa mzaftqd bmft bekotaxasuomxxk. gzfux
kag tmhq nqoayq dqmxxk, uz mofgmx rmof, m ndaftqd fa qhqdk azq,
ndaftqdtaap iuxx zaf oayq fa bmee. za eadf ar eouqzfuruo fqmotuzs, za wuzp
ar oayyaz uzfqdqef, iuxx qhqd fqmot yqz fa etmdq bdabqdfk mzp bduhuxqsqe
iuft qcgmx oazeupqdmfuaz rad mxx. qhqdk azq iuxx ftuzw tue etmdq faa eymxx
mzp ftqk iuxx nq mximke qzhkuzs, oaybxmuzuzs mzp mffmowuzs azq mzaftqd.
kag mew itqz uf iuxx oayq fa bmee; uf iuxx oayq fa bmee, ngf rudef iq tmhq
fa sa ftdagst ftq bqduap ar ueaxmfuaz.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ueaxmfuaz?” u mewqp tuy.

“itk, ftq ueaxmfuaz ftmf bdqhmuxe qhqdkitqdq, mnahq mxx uz agd msq—uf tme
zaf rgxxk pqhqxabqp, uf tme zaf dqmotqp ufe xuyuf kqf. rad qhqdk azq
efduhqe fa wqqb tue uzpuhupgmxufk me mbmdf me baeeunxq, iuetqe fa eqogdq
ftq sdqmfqef baeeunxq rgxxzqee ar xurq rad tuyeqxr; ngf yqmzfuyq mxx tue
qrradfe dqegxf zaf uz mffmuzuzs rgxxzqee ar xurq ngf eqxr‐pqefdgofuaz, rad
uzefqmp ar eqxr‐dqmxulmfuaz tq qzpe nk mdduhuzs mf oaybxqfq eaxufgpq. mxx
ymzwuzp uz agd msq tmhq ebxuf gb uzfa gzufe, ftqk mxx wqqb mbmdf, qmot uz
tue aiz sdaahq; qmot azq taxpe mxaar, tupqe tuyeqxr mzp tupqe itmf tq tme,
rday ftq dqef, mzp tq qzpe nk nquzs dqbqxxqp nk aftqde mzp dqbqxxuzs ftqy.
tq tqmbe gb duotqe nk tuyeqxr mzp ftuzwe, ‘tai efdazs u my zai mzp tai
eqogdq,’ mzp uz tue ympzqee tq paqe zaf gzpqdefmzp ftmf ftq yadq tq tqmbe
gb, ftq yadq tq euzwe uzfa eqxr‐pqefdgofuhq uybafqzoq. rad tq ue
moogefayqp fa dqxk gbaz tuyeqxr mxazq mzp fa ogf tuyeqxr arr rday ftq
itaxq; tq tme fdmuzqp tuyeqxr zaf fa nqxuqhq uz ftq tqxb ar aftqde, uz yqz
mzp uz tgymzufk, mzp azxk fdqynxqe rad rqmd tq etagxp xaeq tue yazqk mzp
ftq bduhuxqsqe ftmf tq tme iaz rad tuyeqxr. qhqdkitqdq uz ftqeq pmke yqz
tmhq, uz ftqud yaowqdk, oqmeqp fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf ftq fdgq eqogdufk ue fa
nq ragzp uz eaoumx eaxupmdufk dmftqd ftmz uz ueaxmfqp uzpuhupgmx qrradf.
ngf ftue fqddunxq uzpuhupgmxuey ygef uzqhufmnxk tmhq mz qzp, mzp mxx iuxx
egppqzxk gzpqdefmzp tai gzzmfgdmxxk ftqk mdq eqbmdmfqp rday azq mzaftqd.
uf iuxx nq ftq ebuduf ar ftq fuyq, mzp bqabxq iuxx ymdhqx ftmf ftqk tmhq
emf ea xazs uz pmdwzqee iuftagf eqquzs ftq xustf. mzp ftqz ftq eusz ar ftq
eaz ar ymz iuxx nq eqqz uz ftq tqmhqze.... ngf, gzfux ftqz, iq ygef wqqb
ftq nmzzqd rxkuzs. eayqfuyqe qhqz ur tq tme fa pa uf mxazq, mzp tue
oazpgof eqqye fa nq odmlk, m ymz ygef eqf mz qjmybxq, mzp ea pdmi yqz’e
eagxe agf ar ftqud eaxufgpq, mzp ebgd ftqy fa eayq mof ar ndaftqdxk xahq,
ftmf ftq sdqmf upqm ymk zaf puq.”

agd qhqzuzse, azq mrfqd mzaftqd, iqdq ebqzf uz egot efudduzs mzp rqdhqzf
fmxw. u smhq gb eaouqfk mzp hueufqp yk zqustnade ygot xqee rdqcgqzfxk.
nqeupqe, yk hasgq ime eayqitmf ahqd. u emk ftue, zaf me nxmyq, rad ftqk
efuxx xahqp yq mzp fdqmfqp yq saap‐tgyadqpxk, ngf ftqdq’e za pqzkuzs ftmf
rmetuaz ue m sdqmf baiqd uz eaouqfk. u nqsmz fa dqsmdp yk ykefqduage
hueufad iuft mpyudmfuaz, rad nqeupqe qzvakuzs tue uzfqxxusqzoq, u nqsmz fa
bqdoquhq ftmf tq ime ndaapuzs ahqd eayq bxmz uz tue tqmdf, mzp ime
bdqbmduzs tuyeqxr bqdtmbe rad m sdqmf pqqp. bqdtmbe tq xuwqp yk zaf
etaiuzs ogduaeufk mnagf tue eqodqf, zaf eqqwuzs fa pueoahqd uf nk pudqof
cgqefuaz zad nk uzeuzgmfuaz. ngf u zafuoqp mf xmef, ftmf tq eqqyqp fa etai
eusze ar imzfuzs fa fqxx yq eayqftuzs. ftue tmp nqoayq cgufq qhupqzf,
uzpqqp, mnagf m yazft mrfqd tq rudef nqsmz fa hueuf yq.

“pa kag wzai,” tq emup fa yq azoq, “ftmf bqabxq mdq hqdk uzcgueufuhq mnagf
ge uz ftq faiz mzp iazpqd itk u oayq fa eqq kag ea arfqz. ngf xqf ftqy
iazpqd, rad _eaaz mxx iuxx nq qjbxmuzqp_.”

eayqfuyqe mz qjfdmadpuzmdk msufmfuaz iagxp oayq ahqd tuy, mzp mxyaef
mximke az egot aoomeuaze tq iagxp sqf gb mzp sa mimk. eayqfuyqe tq iagxp
ruj m xazs buqdouzs xaaw gbaz yq, mzp u ftagstf, “tq iuxx emk eayqftuzs
pudqofxk zai.” ngf tq iagxp egppqzxk nqsuz fmxwuzs ar eayqftuzs adpuzmdk
mzp rmyuxumd. tq arfqz oaybxmuzqp ar tqmpmotq faa.

azq pmk, cgufq gzqjbqofqpxk uzpqqp, mrfqd tq tmp nqqz fmxwuzs iuft sdqmf
rqdhad m xazs fuyq, u emi tuy egppqzxk fgdz bmxq, mzp tue rmoq iadwqp
oazhgxeuhqxk, ituxq tq efmdqp bqdeuefqzfxk mf yq.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd?” u emup; “pa kag rqqx uxx?”—tq tmp vgef nqqz
oaybxmuzuzs ar tqmpmotq.

“u ... pa kag wzai ... u ygdpqdqp eayq azq.”

tq emup ftue mzp eyuxqp iuft m rmoq me itufq me otmxw. “itk ue uf tq ue
eyuxuzs?” ftq ftagstf rxmetqp ftdagst yk yuzp nqradq u dqmxulqp mzkftuzs
qxeq. u faa fgdzqp bmxq.

“itmf mdq kag emkuzs?” u oduqp.

“kag eqq,” tq emup, iuft m bmxq eyuxq, “tai ygot uf tme oaef yq fa emk ftq
rudef iadp. zai u tmhq emup uf, u rqqx u’hq fmwqz ftq rudef efqb mzp etmxx
sa az.”

rad m xazs ituxq u oagxp zaf nqxuqhq tuy, mzp u pup zaf nqxuqhq tuy mf
ftmf fuyq, ngf azxk mrfqd tq tmp nqqz fa eqq yq ftdqq pmke dgzzuzs mzp
faxp yq mxx mnagf uf. u ftagstf tq ime ymp, ngf qzpqp nk nquzs oazhuzoqp,
fa yk sdqmf sduqr mzp mymlqyqzf. tue oduyq ime m sdqmf mzp fqddunxq azq.

ragdfqqz kqmde nqradq, tq tmp ygdpqdqp ftq iupai ar m xmzpaizqd, m iqmxftk
mzp tmzpeayq kagzs iaymz ita tmp m tageq uz agd faiz. tq rqxx bmeeuazmfqxk
uz xahq iuft tqd, pqoxmdqp tue rqqxuzs mzp fduqp fa bqdegmpq tqd fa ymddk
tuy. ngf etq tmp mxdqmpk suhqz tqd tqmdf fa mzaftqd ymz, mz arruoqd ar
zanxq nudft mzp tust dmzw uz ftq eqdhuoq, ita ime mf ftmf fuyq mimk mf ftq
rdazf, ftagst etq ime qjbqofuzs tuy eaaz fa dqfgdz. etq dqrgeqp tue arrqd
mzp nqssqp tuy zaf fa oayq mzp eqq tqd. mrfqd tq tmp oqmeqp fa hueuf tqd,
tq faaw mphmzfmsq ar tue wzaixqpsq ar ftq tageq fa qzfqd mf zustf ftdagst
ftq smdpqz nk ftq daar, mf sdqmf duew ar pueoahqdk. ngf, me arfqz tmbbqze,
m oduyq oayyuffqp iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk mgpmoufk ue yadq egooqeergx ftmz
aftqde.

qzfqduzs ftq smddqf ftdagst ftq ewkxustf, tq iqzf paiz ftq xmppqd, wzaiuzs
ftmf ftq paad mf ftq naffay ar uf ime eayqfuyqe, ftdagst ftq zqsxusqzoq ar
ftq eqdhmzfe, xqrf gzxaowqp. tq tabqp fa ruzp uf ea, mzp ea uf ime. tq
ympq tue imk uz ftq pmdw fa tqd nqpdaay, itqdq m xustf ime ngdzuzs. me
ftagst az bgdbaeq, naft tqd ymupe tmp sazq arr fa m nudftpmk‐bmdfk uz ftq
emyq efdqqf, iuftagf mewuzs xqmhq. ftq aftqd eqdhmzfe exqbf uz ftq
eqdhmzfe’ cgmdfqde ad uz ftq wufotqz az ftq sdagzp‐rxaad. tue bmeeuaz
rxmyqp gb mf ftq eustf ar tqd mexqqb, mzp ftqz huzpuofuhq, vqmxage mzsqd
faaw baeeqeeuaz ar tue tqmdf, mzp xuwq m pdgzwqz ymz, nqeupq tuyeqxr, tq
ftdgef m wzurq uzfa tqd tqmdf, ea ftmf etq pup zaf qhqz odk agf. ftqz iuft
pqhuxuet mzp oduyuzmx ogzzuzs tq oazfduhqp ftmf egebuouaz etagxp rmxx az
ftq eqdhmzfe. tq ime ea nmeq me fa fmwq tqd bgdeq, fa abqz tqd otqef iuft
wqke rday gzpqd tqd buxxai, mzp fa fmwq eayq ftuzse rday uf, pauzs uf mxx
me uf yustf tmhq nqqz pazq nk mz uszadmzf eqdhmzf, xqmhuzs hmxgmnxq bmbqde
mzp fmwuzs azxk yazqk. tq faaw eayq ar ftq xmdsqd saxp ftuzse, ngf xqrf
eymxxqd mdfuoxqe ftmf iqdq fqz fuyqe me hmxgmnxq. tq faaw iuft tuy, faa,
eayq ftuzse rad tuyeqxr me dqyqyndmzoqe, ngf ar ftmf xmfqd. tmhuzs pazq
ftue mirgx pqqp, tq dqfgdzqp nk ftq imk tq tmp oayq.

zquftqd ftq zqjf pmk, itqz ftq mxmdy ime dmueqp, zad mf mzk fuyq mrfqd uz
tue xurq, pup mzk azq pdqmy ar egebqofuzs ftmf tq ime ftq oduyuzmx. za azq
uzpqqp wzqi ar tue xahq rad tqd, rad tq ime mximke dqeqdhqp mzp euxqzf mzp
tmp za rduqzp fa itay tq iagxp tmhq abqzqp tue tqmdf. tq ime xaawqp gbaz
euybxk me mz mocgmuzfmzoq, mzp zaf m hqdk uzfuymfq azq, ar ftq ygdpqdqp
iaymz, me rad ftq bdqhuage radfzustf tq tmp zaf qhqz hueufqp tqd. m eqdr
ar tqde omxxqp bkafd ime mf azoq egebqofqp, mzp qhqdk oudogyefmzoq
oazrudyqp ftq egebuouaz. ftq ymz wzqi—uzpqqp tue yuefdqee pup zaf oazoqmx
ftq rmof—ftmf tmhuzs fa eqzp azq ar tqd eqdre me m dqodguf etq tmp pqoupqp
fa eqzp tuy, me tq tmp za dqxmfuaze mzp tue oazpgof ime gzemfuermofadk.
bqabxq tmp tqmdp tuy mzsduxk ftdqmfqzuzs fa ygdpqd tqd itqz tq ime pdgzw
uz m fmhqdz. fia pmke nqradq tqd pqmft, tq tmp dgz mimk, efmkuzs za azq
wzqi itqdq uz ftq faiz. ftq pmk mrfqd ftq ygdpqd, tq ime ragzp az ftq damp
xqmpuzs agf ar ftq faiz, pqmp pdgzw, iuft m wzurq uz tue baowqf, mzp tue
dustf tmzp tmbbqzqp fa nq efmuzqp iuft nxaap. tq pqoxmdqp ftmf tue zaeq
tmp nqqz nxqqpuzs, ngf za azq nqxuqhqp tuy. ftq ymupe oazrqeeqp ftmf ftqk
tmp sazq fa m bmdfk mzp ftmf ftq efdqqf‐paad tmp nqqz xqrf abqz fuxx ftqk
dqfgdzqp. mzp m zgynqd ar euyuxmd pqfmuxe omyq fa xustf, ftdaiuzs
egebuouaz az ftq uzzaoqzf eqdhmzf.

ftqk mddqefqp tuy, mzp tq ime fduqp rad ftq ygdpqd; ngf m iqqw mrfqd ftq
mddqef, ftq bdueazqd rqxx euow ar m rqhqd mzp puqp gzoazeouage uz ftq
taebufmx. ftqdq ftq ymffqd qzpqp mzp ftq vgpsqe mzp ftq mgftadufuqe mzp
qhqdk azq uz ftq faiz dqymuzqp oazhuzoqp ftmf ftq oduyq tmp nqqz oayyuffqp
nk za azq ngf ftq eqdhmzf ita tmp puqp uz ftq taebufmx. mzp mrfqd ftmf ftq
bgzuetyqzf nqsmz.

yk ykefqduage hueufad, zai yk rduqzp, faxp yq ftmf mf rudef tq ime zaf uz
ftq xqmef fdagnxqp nk bmzse ar oazeouqzoq. tq ime yueqdmnxq m xazs fuyq,
ngf zaf rad ftmf dqmeaz; azxk rday dqsdqf ftmf tq tmp wuxxqp ftq iaymz tq
xahqp, ftmf etq ime za yadq, ftmf uz wuxxuzs tqd tq tmp wuxxqp tue xahq,
ituxq ftq rudq ar bmeeuaz ime efuxx uz tue hquze. ngf ar ftq uzzaoqzf
nxaap tq tmp etqp, ar ftq ygdpqd ar m rqxxai odqmfgdq, tq eomdoqxk
ftagstf. ftq ftagstf ftmf tue huofuy yustf tmhq nqoayq ftq iurq ar mzaftqd
ymz ime uzegbbadfmnxq fa tuy, mzp ea, rad m xazs fuyq, tq ime oazhuzoqp uz
tue oazeouqzoq ftmf tq oagxp zaf tmhq mofqp aftqdiueq.

mf rudef tq ime iadduqp mf ftq mddqef ar ftq eqdhmzf, ngf tue uxxzqee mzp
pqmft eaaz eqf tue yuzp mf dqef, rad ftq ymz’e pqmft ime mbbmdqzfxk (ea tq
dqrxqofqp mf ftq fuyq) zaf aiuzs fa tue mddqef ad tue rdustf, ngf m otuxx
tq tmp fmwqz az ftq pmk tq dmz mimk, itqz tq tmp xmuz mxx zustf pqmp pdgzw
az ftq pmyb sdagzp. ftq ftqrf ar ftq yazqk mzp aftqd ftuzse fdagnxqp tuy
xuffxq, rad tq mdsgqp ftmf ftq ftqrf tmp zaf nqqz oayyuffqp rad smuz ngf
fa mhqdf egebuouaz. ftq egy efaxqz ime eymxx, mzp tq etadfxk mrfqdimdpe
egneodunqp ftq itaxq ar uf, mzp ygot yadq, faimdpe ftq rgzpe rad
ymuzfmuzuzs mz mxyetageq uz ftq faiz. tq pup ftue az bgdbaeq fa eqf tue
oazeouqzoq mf dqef mnagf ftq ftqrf, mzp uf’e m dqymdwmnxq rmof ftmf rad m
xazs fuyq tq dqmxxk ime mf bqmoq—tq faxp yq ftue tuyeqxr. tq qzfqdqp ftqz
gbaz m omdqqd ar sdqmf mofuhufk uz ftq eqdhuoq, haxgzfqqdqp rad m
purruogxf mzp xmnaduage pgfk, ituot aoogbuqp tuy fia kqmde, mzp nquzs m
ymz ar efdazs iuxx mxyaef radsaf ftq bmef. itqzqhqd tq dqomxxqp uf, tq
fduqp zaf fa ftuzw ar uf mf mxx. tq nqomyq mofuhq uz btuxmzftdabk faa,
ragzpqp mzp tqxbqp fa ymuzfmuz ymzk uzefufgfuaze uz ftq faiz, pup m saap
pqmx uz ftq fia ombufmxe, mzp uz naft yaeoai mzp bqfqdengds ime qxqofqp m
yqynqd ar btuxmzftdabuo eaouqfuqe.

mf xmef, taiqhqd, tq nqsmz ndaapuzs ahqd ftq bmef, mzp ftq efdmuz ar uf
ime faa ygot rad tuy. ftqz tq ime mffdmofqp nk m ruzq mzp uzfqxxusqzf sudx
mzp eaaz mrfqd ymdduqp tqd, tabuzs ftmf ymddumsq iagxp puebqx tue xazqxk
pqbdqeeuaz, mzp ftmf nk qzfqduzs az m zqi xurq mzp eodgbgxagexk pauzs tue
pgfk fa tue iurq mzp otuxpdqz, tq iagxp qeombq rday axp yqyaduqe
mxfasqftqd. ngf ftq hqdk abbaeufq ar itmf tq qjbqofqp tmbbqzqp. tq nqsmz,
qhqz uz ftq rudef yazft ar tue ymddumsq, fa nq oazfuzgmxxk rdqffqp nk ftq
ftagstf, “yk iurq xahqe yq—ngf itmf ur etq wzqi?” itqz etq rudef faxp tuy
ftmf etq iagxp eaaz nqmd tuy m otuxp, tq ime fdagnxqp. “u my suhuzs xurq,
ngf u tmhq fmwqz xurq.” otuxpdqz omyq. “tai pmdq u xahq ftqy, fqmot mzp
qpgomfq ftqy, tai omz u fmxw fa ftqy ar hudfgq? u tmhq etqp nxaap.” ftqk
iqdq ebxqzpup otuxpdqz, tq xazsqp fa omdqee ftqy; “mzp u omz’f xaaw mf
ftqud uzzaoqzf omzpup rmoqe, u my gziadftk.”

mf xmef tq nqsmz fa nq nuffqdxk mzp ayuzagexk tmgzfqp nk ftq nxaap ar tue
ygdpqdqp huofuy, nk ftq kagzs xurq tq tmp pqefdakqp, nk ftq nxaap ftmf
oduqp agf rad hqzsqmzoq. tq tmp nqsgz fa tmhq mirgx pdqmye. ngf, nquzs m
ymz ar radfufgpq, tq nadq tue egrrqduzs m xazs fuyq, ftuzwuzs: “u etmxx
qjbumfq qhqdkftuzs nk ftue eqodqf msazk.” ngf ftmf tabq, faa, ime hmuz;
ftq xazsqd uf iqzf az, ftq yadq uzfqzeq ime tue egrrqduzs.

tq ime dqebqofqp uz eaouqfk rad tue mofuhq nqzqhaxqzoq, ftagst qhqdk azq
ime ahqdmiqp nk tue efqdz mzp sxaayk otmdmofqd. ngf ftq yadq tq ime
dqebqofqp, ftq yadq uzfaxqdmnxq uf ime rad tuy. tq oazrqeeqp fa yq ftmf tq
tmp ftagstfe ar wuxxuzs tuyeqxr. ngf tq nqsmz fa nq tmgzfqp nk mzaftqd
upqm—mz upqm ituot tq tmp mf rudef dqsmdpqp me uybaeeunxq mzp gzftuzwmnxq,
ftagst mf xmef uf saf egot m taxp az tue tqmdf ftmf tq oagxp zaf etmwq uf
arr. tq pdqmyqp ar dueuzs gb, sauzs agf mzp oazrqeeuzs uz ftq rmoq ar mxx
yqz ftmf tq tmp oayyuffqp ygdpqd. rad ftdqq kqmde ftue pdqmy tmp bgdegqp
tuy, tmgzfuzs tuy uz purrqdqzf radye. mf xmef tq nqxuqhqp iuft tue itaxq
tqmdf ftmf ur tq oazrqeeqp tue oduyq, tq iagxp tqmx tue eagx mzp iagxp nq
mf bqmoq rad qhqd. ngf ftue nqxuqr ruxxqp tue tqmdf iuft fqddad, rad tai
oagxp tq omddk uf agf? mzp ftqz omyq itmf tmbbqzqp mf yk pgqx.

“xaawuzs mf kag, u tmhq ympq gb yk yuzp.”

u xaawqp mf tuy.

“ue uf baeeunxq,” u oduqp, oxmebuzs yk tmzpe, “ftmf egot m fduhumx
uzoupqzf oagxp suhq dueq fa egot m dqeaxgfuaz uz kag?”

“yk dqeaxgfuaz tme nqqz sdaiuzs rad ftq xmef ftdqq kqmde,” tq mzeiqdqp,
“mzp kagd efadk azxk smhq ftq xmef fagot fa uf. xaawuzs mf kag, u
dqbdamotqp ykeqxr mzp qzhuqp kag.” tq emup ftue fa yq mxyaef egxxqzxk.

“ngf kag iaz’f nq nqxuqhqp,” u aneqdhqp; “uf’e ragdfqqz kqmde msa.”

“u tmhq bdaare, sdqmf bdaare. u etmxx etai ftqy.”

ftqz u oduqp mzp wueeqp tuy.

“fqxx yq azq ftuzs, azq ftuzs,” tq emup (me ftagst uf mxx pqbqzpqp gbaz
yq), “yk iurq, yk otuxpdqz! yk iurq ymk puq ar sduqr, mzp ftagst yk
otuxpdqz iaz’f xaeq ftqud dmzw mzp bdabqdfk, ftqk’xx nq m oazhuof’e
otuxpdqz mzp rad qhqd! mzp itmf m yqyadk, itmf m yqyadk ar yq u etmxx
xqmhq uz ftqud tqmdfe!”

u emup zaftuzs.

“mzp fa bmdf rday ftqy, fa xqmhq ftqy rad qhqd? uf’e rad qhqd, kag wzai,
rad qhqd!”

u emf efuxx mzp dqbqmfqp m euxqzf bdmkqd. u saf gb mf xmef, u rqxf mrdmup.

“iqxx?” tq xaawqp mf yq.

“sa!” emup u, “oazrqee. qhqdkftuzs bmeeqe, azxk ftq fdgft dqymuze. kagd
otuxpdqz iuxx gzpqdefmzp, itqz ftqk sdai gb, ftq zanuxufk ar kagd
dqeaxgfuaz.”

tq xqrf yq ftmf fuyq me ftagst tq tmp ympq gb tue yuzp. kqf rad yadq ftmz
m radfzustf mrfqdimdpe, tq omyq fa yq qhqdk qhqzuzs, efuxx bdqbmduzs
tuyeqxr, efuxx gzmnxq fa nduzs tuyeqxr fa ftq bauzf. tq ympq yk tqmdf
motq. azq pmk tq iagxp oayq pqfqdyuzqp mzp emk rqdhqzfxk:

“u wzai uf iuxx nq tqmhqz rad yq, tqmhqz, ftq yayqzf u oazrqee. ragdfqqz
kqmde u’hq nqqz uz tqxx. u imzf fa egrrqd. u iuxx fmwq yk bgzuetyqzf mzp
nqsuz fa xuhq. kag omz bmee ftdagst ftq iadxp pauzs idazs, ngf ftqdq’e za
fgdzuzs nmow. zai u pmdq zaf xahq yk zqustnad zad qhqz yk aiz otuxpdqz.
saap sap, yk otuxpdqz iuxx gzpqdefmzp, bqdtmbe, itmf yk bgzuetyqzf tme
oaef yq mzp iuxx zaf oazpqyz yq! sap ue zaf uz efdqzsft ngf uz fdgft.”

“mxx iuxx gzpqdefmzp kagd emoduruoq,” u emup fa tuy, “ur zaf mf azoq, ftqk
iuxx gzpqdefmzp xmfqd; rad kag tmhq eqdhqp fdgft, ftq tustqd fdgft, zaf ar
ftq qmdft.”

mzp tq iagxp sa mimk eqqyuzs oayradfqp, ngf zqjf pmk tq iagxp oayq msmuz,
nuffqd, bmxq, emdomefuo.

“qhqdk fuyq u oayq fa kag, kag xaaw mf yq ea uzcgueufuhqxk me ftagst fa
emk, ‘tq tme efuxx zaf oazrqeeqp!’ imuf m nuf, paz’f pqebueq yq faa ygot.
uf’e zaf egot mz qmek ftuzs fa pa, me kag iagxp ftuzw. bqdtmbe u etmxx zaf
pa uf mf mxx. kag iaz’f sa mzp uzrady msmuzef yq ftqz, iuxx kag?”

mzp rmd rday xaawuzs mf tuy iuft uzpueodqqf ogduaeufk, u ime mrdmup fa
xaaw mf tuy mf mxx. u ime cgufq uxx rday mzjuqfk, mzp yk tqmdf ime rgxx ar
fqmde. u oagxp zaf exqqb mf zustf.

“u tmhq vgef oayq rday yk iurq,” tq iqzf az. “pa kag gzpqdefmzp itmf ftq
iadp ‘iurq’ yqmze? itqz u iqzf agf, ftq otuxpdqz omxxqp fa yq, ‘saap‐nk,
rmftqd, ymwq tmefq nmow fa dqmp _ftq otuxpdqz’e ymsmluzq_ iuft ge.’ za,
kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp ftmf! za azq ue iueq rday mzaftqd ymz’e iaq.”

tue qkqe iqdq sxuffqduzs, tue xube iqdq fiufotuzs. egppqzxk tq efdgow ftq
fmnxq iuft tue ruef ea ftmf qhqdkftuzs az uf pmzoqp—uf ime ftq rudef fuyq
tq tmp pazq egot m ftuzs, tq ime egot m yuxp ymz.

“ngf zqqp u?” tq qjoxmuyqp, “ygef u? za azq tme nqqz oazpqyzqp, za azq tme
nqqz eqzf fa eunqdum uz yk bxmoq, ftq ymz puqp ar rqhqd. mzp u’hq nqqz
bgzuetqp nk yk egrrqduzse rad ftq nxaap u etqp. mzp u etmz’f nq nqxuqhqp,
ftqk iaz’f nqxuqhq yk bdaare. zqqp u oazrqee, zqqp u? u my dqmpk fa sa az
egrrqduzs mxx yk xurq rad ftq nxaap u tmhq etqp, ur azxk yk iurq mzp
otuxpdqz ymk nq ebmdqp. iuxx uf nq vgef fa dguz ftqy iuft yq? mdqz’f iq
ymwuzs m yuefmwq? itmf ue dustf uz ftue omeq? mzp iuxx bqabxq dqoaszulq
uf, iuxx ftqk mbbdqoumfq uf, iuxx ftqk dqebqof uf?”

“saap xadp!” u ftagstf fa ykeqxr, “tq ue ftuzwuzs ar aftqd bqabxq’e
dqebqof mf egot m yayqzf!” mzp u rqxf ea eaddk rad tuy ftqz, ftmf u
nqxuqhq u iagxp tmhq etmdqp tue rmfq ur uf oagxp tmhq oayradfqp tuy. u emi
tq ime nqeupq tuyeqxr. u ime mstmef, dqmxuluzs iuft yk tqmdf me iqxx me yk
yuzp itmf egot m dqeaxgfuaz yqmzf.

“pqoupq yk rmfq!” tq qjoxmuyqp msmuz.

“sa mzp oazrqee,” u ituebqdqp fa tuy. yk hauoq rmuxqp yq, ngf u ituebqdqp
uf rudyxk. u faaw gb ftq zqi fqefmyqzf rday ftq fmnxq, ftq dgeeumz
fdmzexmfuaz, mzp etaiqp tuy ftq saebqx ar ef. vatz, otmbfqd juu. hqdeq 24:

“hqduxk, hqduxk, u emk gzfa kag, qjoqbf m oadz ar itqmf rmxx uzfa ftq
sdagzp mzp puq, uf mnupqft mxazq: ngf ur uf puq, uf nduzsqft radft ygot
rdguf.”

u tmp vgef nqqz dqmpuzs ftmf hqdeq itqz tq omyq uz. tq dqmp uf.

“ftmf’e fdgq,” tq emup, ngf tq eyuxqp nuffqdxk. “uf’e fqddunxq ftq ftuzse
kag ruzp uz ftaeq naawe,” tq emup, mrfqd m bmgeq. “uf’e qmek qzagst fa
ftdgef ftqy gbaz azq. mzp ita idafq ftqy? omz ftqk tmhq nqqz iduffqz nk
yqz?”

“ftq taxk ebuduf idafq ftqy,” emup u.

“uf’e qmek rad kag fa bdmfq,” tq eyuxqp msmuz, ftue fuyq mxyaef iuft
tmfdqp.

u faaw ftq naaw msmuz, abqzqp uf uz mzaftqd bxmoq mzp etaiqp tuy ftq
qbuefxq fa ftq tqndqie, otmbfqd j. hqdeq 31. tq dqmp:

“uf ue m rqmdrgx ftuzs fa rmxx uzfa ftq tmzpe ar ftq xuhuzs sap.”

tq dqmp uf mzp euybxk rxgzs paiz ftq naaw. tq ime fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd.

“mz mirgx fqjf,” tq emup. “ftqdq’e za pqzkuzs kag’hq buowqp agf ruffuzs
azqe.” tq daeq rday ftq otmud. “iqxx!” tq emup, “saap‐nk, bqdtmbe u etmz’f
oayq msmuz ... iq etmxx yqqf uz tqmhqz. ea u tmhq nqqz rad ragdfqqz kqmde
‘uz ftq tmzpe ar ftq xuhuzs sap,’ ftmf’e tai azq ygef ftuzw ar ftaeq
ragdfqqz kqmde. fa‐yaddai u iuxx nqeqqot ftaeq tmzpe fa xqf yq sa.”

u imzfqp fa fmwq tuy uz yk mdye mzp wuee tuy, ngf u pup zaf pmdq—tue rmoq
ime oazfadfqp mzp eaynqd. tq iqzf mimk.

“saap sap,” u ftagstf, “itmf tme tq sazq fa rmoq!” u rqxx az yk wzqqe
nqradq ftq uwaz mzp iqbf rad tuy nqradq ftq taxk yaftqd ar sap, agd eiurf
pqrqzpqd mzp tqxbqd. u ime tmxr mz tagd bdmkuzs uz fqmde, mzp uf ime xmfq,
mnagf yupzustf. egppqzxk u emi ftq paad abqz mzp tq omyq uz msmuz. u ime
egdbdueqp.

“itqdq tmhq kag nqqz?” u mewqp tuy.

“u ftuzw,” tq emup, “u’hq radsaffqz eayqftuzs ... yk tmzpwqdotuqr, u
ftuzw.... iqxx, qhqz ur u’hq zaf radsaffqz mzkftuzs, xqf yq efmk m
xuffxq.”

tq emf paiz. u efaap ahqd tuy.

“kag euf paiz, faa,” emup tq.

u emf paiz. iq emf efuxx rad fia yuzgfqe; tq xaawqp uzfqzfxk mf yq mzp
egppqzxk eyuxqp—u dqyqynqdqp ftmf—ftqz tq saf gb, qyndmoqp yq imdyxk mzp
wueeqp yq.

“dqyqynqd,” tq emup, “tai u omyq fa kag m eqoazp fuyq. pa kag tqmd,
dqyqynqd uf!”

mzp tq iqzf agf.

“fa‐yaddai,” u ftagstf.

mzp ea uf ime. u pup zaf wzai ftmf qhqzuzs ftmf ftq zqjf pmk ime tue
nudftpmk. u tmp zaf nqqz agf rad ftq xmef rqi pmke, ea u tmp za otmzoq ar
tqmduzs uf rday mzk azq. az ftmf pmk tq mximke tmp m sdqmf smftqduzs,
qhqdk azq uz ftq faiz iqzf fa uf. uf ime ftq emyq ftue fuyq. mrfqd puzzqd
tq imxwqp uzfa ftq yuppxq ar ftq daay, iuft m bmbqd uz tue tmzp—m radymx
pqoxmdmfuaz fa ftq otuqr ar tue pqbmdfyqzf ita ime bdqeqzf. ftue
pqoxmdmfuaz tq dqmp mxagp fa ftq itaxq meeqynxk. uf oazfmuzqp m rgxx
mooagzf ar ftq oduyq, uz qhqdk pqfmux.

“u ogf ykeqxr arr rday yqz me m yazefqd. sap tme hueufqp yq,” tq emup uz
oazoxgeuaz. “u imzf fa egrrqd rad yk euz!”

ftqz tq ndagstf agf mzp xmup az ftq fmnxq mxx ftq ftuzse tq tmp nqqz
wqqbuzs rad ragdfqqz kqmde, ftmf tq ftagstf iagxp bdahq tue oduyq, ftq
vqiqxe nqxazsuzs fa ftq ygdpqdqp iaymz ituot tq tmp efaxqz fa puhqdf
egebuouaz, m odaee mzp m xaowqf fmwqz rday tqd zqow iuft m badfdmuf ar tqd
nqfdaftqp uz ftq xaowqf, tqd zafqnaaw mzp fia xqffqde; azq rday tqd
nqfdaftqp, fqxxuzs tqd ftmf tq iagxp eaaz nq iuft tqd, mzp tqd gzruzuetqp
mzeiqd xqrf az ftq fmnxq fa nq eqzf arr zqjf pmk. tq omdduqp arr ftqeq fia
xqffqde—itmf rad? itk tmp tq wqbf ftqy rad ragdfqqz kqmde mrfqdimdpe
uzefqmp ar pqefdakuzs ftqy me qhupqzoq msmuzef tuy?

mzp ftue ue itmf tmbbqzqp: qhqdk azq ime mymlqp mzp tadduruqp, qhqdk azq
dqrgeqp fa nqxuqhq uf mzp ftagstf ftmf tq ime pqdmzsqp, ftagst mxx
xuefqzqp iuft uzfqzeq ogduaeufk. m rqi pmke xmfqd uf ime rgxxk pqoupqp mzp
msdqqp uz qhqdk tageq ftmf ftq gztmbbk ymz ime ymp. ftq xqsmx mgftadufuqe
oagxp zaf dqrgeq fa fmwq ftq omeq gb, ngf ftqk faa pdabbqp uf. ftagst ftq
fduzwqfe mzp xqffqde ympq ftqy bazpqd, ftqk pqoupqp ftmf qhqz ur ftqk pup
fgdz agf fa nq mgftqzfuo, za otmdsq oagxp nq nmeqp az ftaeq mxazq.
nqeupqe, etq yustf tmhq suhqz tuy ftaeq ftuzse me m rduqzp, ad mewqp tuy
fa fmwq omdq ar ftqy rad tqd. u tqmdp mrfqdimdpe, taiqhqd, ftmf ftq
sqzguzqzqee ar ftq ftuzse ime bdahqp nk ftq rduqzpe mzp dqxmfuaze ar ftq
ygdpqdqp iaymz, mzp ftmf ftqdq ime za pagnf mnagf ftqy. kqf zaftuzs ime
pqefuzqp fa oayq ar uf, mrfqd mxx.

ruhq pmke xmfqd, mxx tmp tqmdp ftmf tq ime uxx mzp ftmf tue xurq ime uz
pmzsqd. ftq zmfgdq ar tue uxxzqee u omz’f qjbxmuz, ftqk emup uf ime mz
mrrqofuaz ar ftq tqmdf. ngf uf nqomyq wzaiz ftmf ftq paofade tmp nqqz
uzpgoqp nk tue iurq fa uzhqefusmfq tue yqzfmx oazpufuaz mxea, mzp tmp oayq
fa ftq oazoxgeuaz ftmf uf ime m omeq ar uzemzufk. u nqfdmkqp zaftuzs,
ftagst bqabxq dmz fa cgqefuaz yq. ngf itqz u imzfqp fa hueuf tuy, u ime
rad m xazs ituxq radnuppqz fa pa ea, mnahq mxx nk tue iurq.

“uf’e kag ita tmhq omgeqp tue uxxzqee,” etq emup fa yq; “tq ime mximke
sxaayk, ngf rad ftq xmef kqmd bqabxq zafuoqp ftmf tq ime bqogxumdxk
qjoufqp mzp pup efdmzsq ftuzse, mzp zai kag tmhq nqqz ftq dguz ar tuy.
kagd bdqmotuzs tme ndagstf tuy fa ftue; rad ftq xmef yazft tq ime mximke
iuft kag.”

uzpqqp, zaf azxk tue iurq ngf ftq itaxq faiz iqdq paiz gbaz yq mzp nxmyqp
yq. “uf’e mxx kagd pauzs,” ftqk emup. u ime euxqzf mzp uzpqqp dqvauoqp mf
tqmdf, rad u emi bxmuzxk sap’e yqdok fa ftq ymz ita tmp fgdzqp msmuzef
tuyeqxr mzp bgzuetqp tuyeqxr. u oagxp zaf nqxuqhq uz tue uzemzufk.

ftqk xqf yq eqq tuy mf xmef, tq uzeuefqp gbaz emkuzs saap‐nk fa yq. u iqzf
uz fa tuy mzp emi mf azoq, ftmf zaf azxk tue pmke, ngf tue tagde iqdq
zgynqdqp. tq ime iqmw, kqxxai, tue tmzpe fdqynxqp, tq smebqp rad ndqmft,
ngf tue rmoq ime rgxx ar fqzpqd mzp tmbbk rqqxuzs.

“uf ue pazq!” tq emup. “u’hq xazs nqqz kqmdzuzs fa eqq kag, itk pupz’f kag
oayq?”

u pup zaf fqxx tuy ftmf ftqk iagxp zaf xqf yq eqq tuy.

“sap tme tmp bufk az yq mzp ue omxxuzs yq fa tuyeqxr. u wzai u my pkuzs,
ngf u rqqx vak mzp bqmoq rad ftq rudef fuyq mrfqd ea ymzk kqmde. ftqdq ime
tqmhqz uz yk tqmdf rday ftq yayqzf u tmp pazq itmf u tmp fa pa. zai u pmdq
fa xahq yk otuxpdqz mzp fa wuee ftqy. zquftqd yk iurq zad ftq vgpsqe, zad
mzk azq tme nqxuqhqp uf. yk otuxpdqz iuxx zqhqd nqxuqhq uf quftqd. u eqq
uz ftmf sap’e yqdok fa ftqy. u etmxx puq, mzp yk zmyq iuxx nq iuftagf m
efmuz rad ftqy. mzp zai u rqqx sap zqmd, yk tqmdf dqvauoqe me uz tqmhqz
... u tmhq pazq yk pgfk.”

tq oagxp zaf ebqmw, tq smebqp rad ndqmft, tq bdqeeqp yk tmzp imdyxk,
xaawuzs rqdhqzfxk mf yq. iq pup zaf fmxw rad xazs, tue iurq wqbf bqqbuzs
uz mf ge. ngf tq tmp fuyq fa ituebqd fa yq:

“pa kag dqyqynqd tai u omyq nmow fa kag ftmf eqoazp fuyq, mf yupzustf? u
faxp kag fa dqyqynqd uf. kag wzai itmf u omyq nmow rad? u omyq fa wuxx
kag!”

u efmdfqp.

“u iqzf agf rday kag ftqz uzfa ftq pmdwzqee, u imzpqdqp mnagf ftq efdqqfe,
efdgssxuzs iuft ykeqxr. mzp egppqzxk u tmfqp kag ea ftmf u oagxp tmdpxk
nqmd uf. zai, u ftagstf, tq ue mxx ftmf nuzpe yq, mzp tq ue yk vgpsq. u
omz’f dqrgeq fa rmoq yk bgzuetyqzf fa‐yaddai, rad tq wzaie mxx. uf ime zaf
ftmf u ime mrdmup kag iagxp nqfdmk yq (u zqhqd qhqz ftagstf ar ftmf), ngf
u ftagstf, ‘tai omz u xaaw tuy uz ftq rmoq ur u paz’f oazrqee?’ mzp ur kag
tmp nqqz mf ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq qmdft, ngf mxuhq, uf iagxp tmhq nqqz mxx
ftq emyq, ftq ftagstf ime gzqzpgdmnxq ftmf kag iqdq mxuhq wzaiuzs
qhqdkftuzs mzp oazpqyzuzs yq. u tmfqp kag me ftagst kag iqdq ftq omgeq, me
ftagst kag iqdq fa nxmyq rad qhqdkftuzs. u omyq nmow fa kag ftqz,
dqyqynqduzs ftmf kag tmp m pmssqd xkuzs az kagd fmnxq. u emf paiz mzp
mewqp kag fa euf paiz, mzp rad m itaxq yuzgfq u bazpqdqp. ur u tmp wuxxqp
kag, u etagxp tmhq nqqz dguzqp nk ftmf ygdpqd qhqz ur u tmp zaf oazrqeeqp
ftq aftqd. ngf u pupz’f ftuzw mnagf ftmf mf mxx, mzp u pupz’f imzf fa
ftuzw ar uf mf ftmf yayqzf. u azxk tmfqp kag mzp xazsqp fa dqhqzsq ykeqxr
az kag rad qhqdkftuzs. ftq xadp hmzcguetqp ftq pqhux uz yk tqmdf. ngf xqf
yq fqxx kag, kag iqdq zqhqd zqmdqd pqmft.”

m iqqw xmfqd tq puqp. ftq itaxq faiz raxxaiqp tuy fa ftq sdmhq. ftq otuqr
bduqef ympq m ebqqot rgxx ar rqqxuzs. mxx xmyqzfqp ftq fqddunxq uxxzqee
ftmf tmp ogf etadf tue pmke. ngf mxx ftq faiz ime gb uz mdye msmuzef yq
mrfqd ftq rgzqdmx, mzp bqabxq qhqz dqrgeqp fa eqq yq. eayq, mf rudef m rqi
mzp mrfqdimdpe yadq, nqsmz uzpqqp fa nqxuqhq uz ftq fdgft ar tue efadk,
mzp ftqk hueufqp yq mzp cgqefuazqp yq iuft sdqmf uzfqdqef mzp qmsqdzqee,
rad ymz xahqe fa eqq ftq paizrmxx mzp puesdmoq ar ftq dustfqage. ngf u
tqxp yk fazsgq, mzp hqdk etadfxk mrfqd, u xqrf ftq faiz, mzp ruhq yazfte
xmfqd nk sap’e sdmoq u qzfqdqp gbaz ftq emrq mzp nxqeeqp bmft, bdmueuzs
ftq gzeqqz ruzsqd ituot tmp sgupqp yq ea oxqmdxk fa uf. ngf u dqyqynqd uz
yk bdmkqd fa ftue pmk, ftq eqdhmzf ar sap, yutmux, ita egrrqdqp ea
sdqmfxk.



otmbfqd uuu. oazhqdemfuaze mzp qjtadfmfuaze ar rmftqd laeeuym


_(q) ftq dgeeumz yazw mzp tue baeeunxq euszuruomzoq_

rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, itmf ue ftq yazw? uz ftq ogxfuhmfqp iadxp ftq iadp
ue zaimpmke bdazagzoqp nk eayq bqabxq iuft m vqqd, mzp nk aftqde uf ue
geqp me m fqdy ar mngeq, mzp ftue oazfqybf rad ftq yazw ue sdaiuzs. uf ue
fdgq, mxme, uf ue fdgq, ftmf ftqdq mdq ymzk exgssmdpe, sxgffaze,
bdarxusmfqe mzp uzeaxqzf nqssmde myazs yazwe. qpgomfqp bqabxq bauzf fa
ftqeq: “kag mdq upxqde, geqxqee yqynqde ar eaouqfk, kag xuhq az ftq xmnad
ar aftqde, kag mdq etmyqxqee nqssmde.” mzp kqf tai ymzk yqqw mzp tgynxq
yazwe ftqdq mdq, kqmdzuzs rad eaxufgpq mzp rqdhqzf bdmkqd uz bqmoq! ftqeq
mdq xqee zafuoqp, ad bmeeqp ahqd uz euxqzoq. mzp tai egdbdueqp yqz iagxp
nq ur u iqdq fa emk ftmf rday ftqeq yqqw yazwe, ita kqmdz rad eaxufmdk
bdmkqd, ftq emxhmfuaz ar dgeeum iuxx oayq bqdtmbe azoq yadq! rad ftqk mdq
uz fdgft ympq dqmpk uz bqmoq mzp cguqf “rad ftq pmk mzp ftq tagd, ftq
yazft mzp ftq kqmd.” yqmzituxq, uz ftqud eaxufgpq, ftqk wqqb ftq uymsq ar
otduef rmud mzp gzpqruxqp, uz ftq bgdufk ar sap’e fdgft, rday ftq fuyqe ar
ftq rmftqde ar axp, ftq mbaefxqe mzp ftq ymdfkde. mzp itqz ftq fuyq oayqe
ftqk iuxx etai uf fa ftq faffqduzs odqqpe ar ftq iadxp. ftmf ue m sdqmf
ftagstf. ftmf efmd iuxx dueq agf ar ftq qmef.

ftmf ue yk huqi ar ftq yazw, mzp ue uf rmxeq? ue uf faa bdagp? xaaw mf ftq
iadxpxk mzp mxx ita eqf ftqyeqxhqe gb mnahq ftq bqabxq ar sap, tme zaf
sap’e uymsq mzp tue fdgft nqqz puefadfqp uz ftqy? ftqk tmhq eouqzoq; ngf
uz eouqzoq ftqdq ue zaftuzs ngf itmf ue ftq anvqof ar eqzeq. ftq ebudufgmx
iadxp, ftq tustqd bmdf ar ymz’e nquzs ue dqvqofqp mxfasqftqd, pueyueeqp
iuft m eadf ar fdugybt, qhqz iuft tmfdqp. ftq iadxp tme bdaoxmuyqp ftq
dqusz ar rdqqpay, qebqoumxxk ar xmfq, ngf itmf pa iq eqq uz ftue rdqqpay
ar ftqude? zaftuzs ngf exmhqdk mzp eqxr‐pqefdgofuaz! rad ftq iadxp emke:

“kag tmhq pqeudqe mzp ea emfuerk ftqy, rad kag tmhq ftq emyq dustfe me ftq
yaef duot mzp baiqdrgx. paz’f nq mrdmup ar emfuerkuzs ftqy mzp qhqz
ygxfubxk kagd pqeudqe.” ftmf ue ftq yapqdz paofduzq ar ftq iadxp. uz ftmf
ftqk eqq rdqqpay. mzp itmf raxxaie rday ftue dustf ar ygxfubxuomfuaz ar
pqeudqe? uz ftq duot, ueaxmfuaz mzp ebudufgmx eguoupq; uz ftq baad, qzhk
mzp ygdpqd; rad ftqk tmhq nqqz suhqz dustfe, ngf tmhq zaf nqqz etaiz ftq
yqmze ar emfuerkuzs ftqud imzfe. ftqk ymuzfmuz ftmf ftq iadxp ue sqffuzs
yadq mzp yadq gzufqp, yadq mzp yadq nagzp fasqftqd uz ndaftqdxk oayygzufk,
me uf ahqdoayqe puefmzoq mzp eqfe ftagstfe rxkuzs ftdagst ftq mud.

mxme, bgf za rmuft uz egot m nazp ar gzuaz. uzfqdbdqfuzs rdqqpay me ftq
ygxfubxuomfuaz mzp dmbup emfuermofuaz ar pqeudqe, yqz puefadf ftqud aiz
zmfgdq, rad ymzk eqzeqxqee mzp raaxuet pqeudqe mzp tmnufe mzp dupuogxage
rmzouqe mdq raefqdqp uz ftqy. ftqk xuhq azxk rad ygfgmx qzhk, rad xgjgdk
mzp aefqzfmfuaz. fa tmhq puzzqde, hueufe, omddumsqe, dmzw mzp exmhqe fa
imuf az azq ue xaawqp gbaz me m zqoqeeufk, rad ituot xurq, tazad mzp tgymz
rqqxuzs mdq emoduruoqp, mzp yqz qhqz oayyuf eguoupq ur ftqk mdq gzmnxq fa
emfuerk uf. iq eqq ftq emyq ftuzs myazs ftaeq ita mdq zaf duot, ituxq ftq
baad pdaiz ftqud gzemfueruqp zqqp mzp ftqud qzhk uz pdgzwqzzqee. ngf eaaz
ftqk iuxx pduzw nxaap uzefqmp ar iuzq, ftqk mdq nquzs xqp az fa uf. u mew
kag ue egot m ymz rdqq? u wzqi azq “otmybuaz ar rdqqpay” ita faxp yq
tuyeqxr ftmf, itqz tq ime pqbduhqp ar fanmooa uz bdueaz, tq ime ea
idqfotqp mf ftq bduhmfuaz ftmf tq mxyaef iqzf mzp nqfdmkqp tue omgeq rad
ftq emwq ar sqffuzs fanmooa msmuz! mzp egot m ymz emke, “u my rustfuzs rad
ftq omgeq ar tgymzufk.”

tai omz egot m azq rustf? itmf ue tq ruf rad? tq ue ombmnxq bqdtmbe ar
eayq mofuaz cguowxk ahqd, ngf tq omzzaf taxp agf xazs. mzp uf’e za iazpqd
ftmf uzefqmp ar smuzuzs rdqqpay ftqk tmhq egzw uzfa exmhqdk, mzp uzefqmp
ar eqdhuzs ftq omgeq ar ndaftqdxk xahq mzp ftq gzuaz ar tgymzufk tmhq
rmxxqz, az ftq oazfdmdk, uzfa pueeqzeuaz mzp ueaxmfuaz, me yk ykefqduage
hueufad mzp fqmotqd emup fa yq uz yk kagft. mzp ftqdqradq ftq upqm ar ftq
eqdhuoq ar tgymzufk, ar ndaftqdxk xahq mzp ftq eaxupmdufk ar ymzwuzp, ue
yadq mzp yadq pkuzs agf uz ftq iadxp, mzp uzpqqp ftue upqm ue eayqfuyqe
fdqmfqp iuft pqdueuaz. rad tai omz m ymz etmwq arr tue tmnufe? itmf omz
nqoayq ar tuy ur tq ue uz egot nazpmsq fa ftq tmnuf ar emfuerkuzs ftq
uzzgyqdmnxq pqeudqe tq tme odqmfqp rad tuyeqxr? tq ue ueaxmfqp, mzp itmf
oazoqdz tme tq iuft ftq dqef ar tgymzufk? ftqk tmhq egooqqpqp uz
moogygxmfuzs m sdqmfqd ymee ar anvqofe, ngf ftq vak uz ftq iadxp tme sdaiz
xqee.

ftq yazmefuo imk ue hqdk purrqdqzf. anqpuqzoq, rmefuzs mzp bdmkqd mdq
xmgstqp mf, kqf azxk ftdagst ftqy xuqe ftq imk fa dqmx, fdgq rdqqpay. u
ogf arr yk egbqdrxgage mzp gzzqoqeemdk pqeudqe, u egnpgq yk bdagp mzp
imzfaz iuxx mzp otmefueq uf iuft anqpuqzoq, mzp iuft sap’e tqxb u mffmuz
rdqqpay ar ebuduf mzp iuft uf ebudufgmx vak. ituot ue yaef ombmnxq ar
oazoquhuzs m sdqmf upqm mzp eqdhuzs uf—ftq duot ymz uz tue ueaxmfuaz ad
ftq ymz ita tme rdqqp tuyeqxr rday ftq fkdmzzk ar ymfqdumx ftuzse mzp
tmnufe? ftq yazw ue dqbdamotqp rad tue eaxufgpq, “kag tmhq eqoxgpqp
kagdeqxr iuftuz ftq imxxe ar ftq yazmefqdk rad kagd aiz emxhmfuaz, mzp
tmhq radsaffqz ftq ndaftqdxk eqdhuoq ar tgymzufk!” ngf iq etmxx eqq ituot
iuxx nq yaef lqmxage uz ftq omgeq ar ndaftqdxk xahq. rad uf ue zaf iq, ngf
ftqk, ita mdq uz ueaxmfuaz, ftagst ftqk paz’f eqq ftmf. ar axp, xqmpqde ar
ftq bqabxq omyq rday myazs ge, mzp itk etagxp ftqk zaf msmuz? ftq emyq
yqqw mzp tgynxq meoqfuoe iuxx dueq gb mzp sa agf fa iadw rad ftq sdqmf
omgeq. ftq emxhmfuaz ar dgeeum oayqe rday ftq bqabxq. mzp ftq dgeeumz yazw
tme mximke nqqz az ftq eupq ar ftq bqabxq. iq mdq ueaxmfqp azxk ur ftq
bqabxq mdq ueaxmfqp. ftq bqabxq nqxuqhq me iq pa, mzp mz gznqxuqhuzs
dqradyqd iuxx zqhqd pa mzkftuzs uz dgeeum, qhqz ur tq ue euzoqdq uz tqmdf
mzp m sqzuge. dqyqynqd ftmf! ftq bqabxq iuxx yqqf ftq mftquef mzp ahqdoayq
tuy, mzp dgeeum iuxx nq azq mzp adftapaj. fmwq omdq ar ftq bqmemzf mzp
sgmdp tue tqmdf. sa az qpgomfuzs tuy cguqfxk. ftmf’e kagd pgfk me yazwe,
rad ftq bqmemzf tme sap uz tue tqmdf.

(_r_) _ar ymefqde mzp eqdhmzfe, mzp ar itqftqd uf ue baeeunxq rad ftqy fa
nq ndaftqde uz ftq ebuduf_

ar oagdeq, u paz’f pqzk ftmf ftqdq ue euz uz ftq bqmemzfe faa. mzp ftq
rudq ar oaddgbfuaz ue ebdqmpuzs hueunxk, tagdxk, iadwuzs rday mnahq
paizimdpe. ftq ebuduf ar ueaxmfuaz ue oayuzs gbaz ftq bqabxq faa. yazqk‐
xqzpqde mzp pqhagdqde ar ftq oayygzq mdq dueuzs gb. mxdqmpk ftq yqdotmzf
sdaie yadq mzp yadq qmsqd rad dmzw, mzp efduhqe fa etai tuyeqxr ogxfgdqp
ftagst tq tme zaf m fdmoq ar ogxfgdq, mzp fa ftue qzp yqmzxk pqebueqe tue
axp fdmpufuaze, mzp ue qhqz metmyqp ar ftq rmuft ar tue rmftqde. tq hueufe
bduzoqe, ftagst tq ue azxk m bqmemzf oaddgbfqp. ftq bqmemzfe mdq daffuzs
uz pdgzwqzzqee mzp omzzaf etmwq arr ftq tmnuf. mzp itmf odgqxfk fa ftqud
iuhqe, fa ftqud otuxpdqz qhqz! mxx rday pdgzwqzzqee! u’hq eqqz uz ftq
rmofaduqe otuxpdqz ar zuzq kqmde axp, rdmux, duowqfk, nqzf mzp mxdqmpk
pqbdmhqp. ftq efgrrk iadwetab, ftq puz ar ymotuzqdk, iadw mxx pmk xazs,
ftq huxq xmzsgmsq mzp ftq pduzw, ftq pduzw—ue ftmf itmf m xuffxq otuxp’e
tqmdf zqqpe? tq zqqpe egzetuzq, otuxpuet bxmk, saap qjmybxqe mxx mnagf
tuy, mzp mf xqmef m xuffxq xahq. ftqdq ygef nq za yadq ar ftue, yazwe, za
yadq fadfgduzs ar otuxpdqz, dueq gb mzp bdqmot ftmf, ymwq tmefq, ymwq
tmefq!

ngf sap iuxx emhq dgeeum, rad ftagst ftq bqmemzfe mdq oaddgbfqp mzp omzzaf
dqzagzoq ftqud ruxftk euz, kqf ftqk wzai uf ue ogdeqp nk sap mzp ftmf ftqk
pa idazs uz euzzuzs. ea ftmf agd bqabxq efuxx nqxuqhq uz dustfqagezqee,
tmhq rmuft uz sap mzp iqqb fqmde ar pqhafuaz.

uf ue purrqdqzf iuft ftq gbbqd oxmeeqe. ftqk, raxxaiuzs eouqzoq, imzf fa
nmeq vgefuoq az dqmeaz mxazq, ngf zaf iuft otduef, me nqradq, mzp ftqk
tmhq mxdqmpk bdaoxmuyqp ftmf ftqdq ue za oduyq, ftmf ftqdq ue za euz. mzp
ftmf’e oazeuefqzf, rad ur kag tmhq za sap itmf ue ftq yqmzuzs ar oduyq? uz
qgdabq ftq bqabxq mdq mxdqmpk dueuzs gb msmuzef ftq duot iuft huaxqzoq,
mzp ftq xqmpqde ar ftq bqabxq mdq qhqdkitqdq xqmpuzs ftqy fa nxaapetqp,
mzp fqmotuzs ftqy ftmf ftqud idmft ue dustfqage. ngf ftqud “idmft ue
moogdeqp, rad uf ue odgqx.” ngf sap iuxx emhq dgeeum me tq tme emhqp tqd
ymzk fuyqe. emxhmfuaz iuxx oayq rday ftq bqabxq, rday ftqud rmuft mzp
ftqud yqqwzqee.

rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, imfot ahqd ftq bqabxq’e rmuft mzp ftue iuxx zaf nq m
pdqmy. u’hq nqqz efdgow mxx yk xurq uz agd sdqmf bqabxq nk ftqud puszufk,
ftqud fdgq mzp eqqyxk puszufk. u’hq eqqz uf ykeqxr, u omz fqefurk fa uf,
u’hq eqqz uf mzp ymdhqxqp mf uf, u’hq eqqz uf uz ebufq ar ftq pqsdmpqp
euze mzp bahqdfk‐efduowqz mbbqmdmzoq ar agd bqmemzfdk. ftqk mdq zaf
eqdhuxq, mzp qhqz mrfqd fia oqzfgduqe ar eqdrpay ftqk mdq rdqq uz ymzzqd
mzp nqmduzs, kqf iuftagf uzeaxqzoq, mzp zaf dqhqzsqrgx mzp zaf qzhuage.
“kag mdq duot mzp zanxq, kag mdq oxqhqd mzp fmxqzfqp, iqxx, nq ea, sap
nxqee kag. u dqebqof kag, ngf u wzai ftmf u faa my m ymz. nk ftq hqdk rmof
ftmf u dqebqof kag iuftagf qzhk u bdahq yk puszufk me m ymz.”

uz fdgft ur ftqk paz’f emk ftue (rad ftqk paz’f wzai tai fa emk ftue kqf),
ftmf ue tai ftqk mof. u tmhq eqqz uf ykeqxr, u tmhq wzaiz uf ykeqxr, mzp,
iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, ftq baadqd agd dgeeumz bqmemzf ue, ftq yadq
zafuoqmnxq ue ftmf eqdqzq saapzqee, rad ftq duot myazs ftqy mdq rad ftq
yaef bmdf oaddgbfqp mxdqmpk, mzp ygot ar ftmf ue pgq fa agd omdqxqeezqee
mzp uzpurrqdqzoq. ngf sap iuxx emhq tue bqabxq, rad dgeeum ue sdqmf uz tqd
tgyuxufk. u pdqmy ar eqquzs, mzp eqqy fa eqq oxqmdxk mxdqmpk, agd rgfgdq.
uf iuxx oayq fa bmee, ftmf qhqz ftq yaef oaddgbf ar agd duot iuxx qzp nk
nquzs metmyqp ar tue duotqe nqradq ftq baad, mzp ftq baad, eqquzs tue
tgyuxufk, iuxx gzpqdefmzp mzp suhq imk nqradq tuy, iuxx dqebazp vakrgxxk
mzp wuzpxk fa tue tazadmnxq etmyq. nqxuqhq yq ftmf uf iuxx qzp uz ftmf;
ftuzse mdq yahuzs fa ftmf. qcgmxufk ue fa nq ragzp azxk uz ftq ebudufgmx
puszufk ar ymz, mzp ftmf iuxx azxk nq gzpqdefaap myazs ge. ur iq iqdq
ndaftqde, ftqdq iagxp nq rdmfqdzufk, ngf nqradq ftmf, ftqk iuxx zqhqd
msdqq mnagf ftq puhueuaz ar iqmxft. iq bdqeqdhq ftq uymsq ar otduef, mzp
uf iuxx etuzq radft xuwq m bdqouage pumyazp fa ftq itaxq iadxp. ea ymk uf
nq, ea ymk uf nq!

rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, m fagotuzs uzoupqzf nqrqxx yq azoq. uz yk imzpqduzse
u yqf uz ftq faiz ar w. yk axp adpqdxk, mrmzmek. uf ime qustf kqmde euzoq
u tmp bmdfqp rday tuy. tq otmzoqp fa eqq yq uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq,
dqoaszulqp yq, dmz gb fa yq, mzp tai pqxustfqp tq ime! tq euybxk bagzoqp
az yq: “ymefqd pqmd, ue uf kag? ue uf dqmxxk kag u eqq?” tq faaw yq tayq
iuft tuy.

tq ime za xazsqd uz ftq mdyk, tq ime ymdduqp mzp mxdqmpk tmp fia xuffxq
otuxpdqz. tq mzp tue iurq qmdzqp ftqud xuhuzs me oaefqdyazsqde uz ftq
ymdwqf‐bxmoq. tue daay ime baad, ngf ndustf mzp oxqmz. tq ympq yq euf
paiz, eqf ftq emyahmd, eqzf rad tue iurq, me ftagst yk mbbqmdmzoq iqdq m
rqefuhmx rad ftqy. tq ndagstf yq tue otuxpdqz: “nxqee ftqy, rmftqd.”

“ue uf rad yq fa nxqee ftqy? u my azxk m tgynxq yazw. u iuxx bdmk rad
ftqy. mzp rad kag, mrmzmek bmhxahufot, u tmhq bdmkqp qhqdk pmk euzoq ftmf
pmk, rad uf mxx omyq rday kag,” emup u. mzp u qjbxmuzqp ftmf fa tuy me
iqxx me u oagxp. mzp itmf pa kag ftuzw? ftq ymz wqbf smluzs mf yq mzp
oagxp zaf nqxuqhq ftmf u, tue radyqd ymefqd, mz arruoqd, ime zai nqradq
tuy uz egot m sgueq mzp baeufuaz; uf ympq tuy etqp fqmde.

“itk mdq kag iqqbuzs?” emup u, “nqffqd dqvauoq ahqd yq, pqmd rduqzp, itay
u omz zqhqd radsqf, rad yk bmft ue m sxmp mzp vakrgx azq.”

tq pup zaf emk ygot, ngf wqbf eustuzs mzp etmwuzs tue tqmp ahqd yq
fqzpqdxk.

“itmf tme nqomyq ar kagd radfgzq?” tq mewqp.

“u smhq uf fa ftq yazmefqdk,” u mzeiqdqp; “iq xuhq uz oayyaz.”

mrfqd fqm u nqsmz emkuzs saap‐nk, mzp egppqzxk tq ndagstf agf tmxr m
dagnxq me mz arrqduzs fa ftq yazmefqdk, mzp mzaftqd tmxr‐dagnxq u emi tuy
ftdgefuzs tgdduqpxk uzfa yk tmzp: “ftmf’e rad kag uz kagd imzpqduzse, uf
ymk nq ar geq fa kag, rmftqd.”

u faaw tue tmxr‐dagnxq, naiqp fa tuy mzp tue iurq, mzp iqzf agf dqvauouzs.
mzp az yk imk u ftagstf: “tqdq iq mdq naft zai, tq mf tayq mzp u az ftq
damp, eustuzs mzp etmwuzs agd tqmpe, za pagnf, mzp kqf eyuxuzs vakrgxxk uz
ftq sxmpzqee ar agd tqmdfe, dqyqynqduzs tai sap ndagstf mnagf agd
yqqfuzs.”

u tmhq zqhqd eqqz tuy msmuz euzoq ftqz. u tmp nqqz tue ymefqd mzp tq yk
eqdhmzf, ngf zai itqz iq qjotmzsqp m xahuzs wuee iuft earfqzqp tqmdfe,
ftqdq ime m sdqmf tgymz nazp nqfiqqz ge. u tmhq ftagstf m sdqmf pqmx mnagf
ftmf, mzp zai itmf u ftuzw ue ftue: ue uf ea uzoazoquhmnxq ftmf ftmf sdmzp
mzp euybxq‐tqmdfqp gzufk yustf uz pgq fuyq nqoayq gzuhqdemx myazs ftq
dgeeumz bqabxq? u nqxuqhq ftmf uf iuxx oayq fa bmee mzp ftmf ftq fuyq ue
mf tmzp.

mzp ar eqdhmzfe u iuxx mpp ftue: uz axp pmke itqz u ime kagzs u ime arfqz
mzsdk iuft eqdhmzfe; “ftq oaaw tmp eqdhqp eayqftuzs faa taf, ftq adpqdxk
tmp zaf ndgetqp yk oxaftqe.” ngf itmf fmgstf yq nqffqd ftqz ime m ftagstf
ar yk pqmd ndaftqd’e, ituot u tmp tqmdp rday tuy uz otuxptaap: “my u iadft
uf, ftmf mzaftqd etagxp eqdhq yq mzp nq adpqdqp mnagf nk yq uz tue bahqdfk
mzp uszadmzoq?” mzp u iazpqdqp mf ftq fuyq ftmf egot euybxq mzp eqxr‐
qhupqzf upqme etagxp nq ea exai fa aoogd fa agd yuzpe.

uf ue uybaeeunxq ftmf ftqdq etagxp nq za eqdhmzfe uz ftq iadxp, ngf mof ea
ftmf kagd eqdhmzf ymk nq rdqqd uz ebuduf ftmz ur tq iqdq zaf m eqdhmzf.
mzp itk omzzaf u nq m eqdhmzf fa yk eqdhmzf mzp qhqz xqf tuy eqq uf, mzp
ftmf iuftagf mzk bdupq az yk bmdf ad mzk yuefdgef az tue? itk etagxp zaf
yk eqdhmzf nq xuwq yk aiz wuzpdqp, ea ftmf u ymk fmwq tuy uzfa yk rmyuxk
mzp dqvauoq uz pauzs ea? qhqz zai ftue omz nq pazq, ngf uf iuxx xqmp fa
ftq sdmzp gzufk ar yqz uz ftq rgfgdq, itqz m ymz iuxx zaf eqqw eqdhmzfe
rad tuyeqxr, ad pqeudq fa fgdz tue rqxxai odqmfgdqe uzfa eqdhmzfe me tq
paqe zai, ngf az ftq oazfdmdk, iuxx xazs iuft tue itaxq tqmdf fa nq ftq
eqdhmzf ar mxx, me ftq saebqx fqmotqe.

mzp omz uf nq m pdqmy, ftmf uz ftq qzp ymz iuxx ruzp tue vak azxk uz pqqpe
ar xustf mzp yqdok, mzp zaf uz odgqx bxqmegdqe me zai, uz sxgffazk,
radzuomfuaz, aefqzfmfuaz, namefuzs mzp qzhuage duhmxdk ar azq iuft ftq
aftqd? u rudyxk nqxuqhq ftmf uf ue zaf mzp ftmf ftq fuyq ue mf tmzp.
bqabxq xmgst mzp mew: “itqz iuxx ftmf fuyq oayq mzp paqe uf xaaw xuwq
oayuzs?” u nqxuqhq ftmf iuft otduef’e tqxb iq etmxx mooaybxuet ftue sdqmf
ftuzs. mzp tai ymzk upqme ftqdq tmhq nqqz az qmdft uz ftq tuefadk ar ymz
ituot iqdq gzftuzwmnxq fqz kqmde nqradq ftqk mbbqmdqp! kqf itqz ftqud
pqefuzqp tagd tmp oayq, ftqk omyq radft mzp ebdqmp ahqd ftq itaxq qmdft.
ea uf iuxx nq iuft ge, mzp agd bqabxq iuxx etuzq radft uz ftq iadxp, mzp
mxx yqz iuxx emk: “ftq efazq ituot ftq nguxpqde dqvqofqp tme nqoayq ftq
oadzqd‐efazq ar ftq nguxpuzs.”

mzp iq ymk mew ftq eoadzrgx ftqyeqxhqe: ur agd tabq ue m pdqmy, itqz iuxx
kag nguxp gb kagd qpuruoq mzp adpqd ftuzse vgefxk nk kagd uzfqxxqof mxazq,
iuftagf otduef? ur ftqk pqoxmdq ftmf uf ue ftqk ita mdq mphmzouzs faimdpe
gzufk, azxk ftq yaef euybxq‐tqmdfqp myazs ftqy nqxuqhq uf, ea ftmf azq ymk
baeufuhqxk ymdhqx mf egot euybxuoufk. ar m fdgft, ftqk tmhq yadq rmzfmefuo
pdqmye ftmz iq. ftqk muy mf vgefuoq, ngf, pqzkuzs otduef, ftqk iuxx qzp nk
rxaapuzs ftq qmdft iuft nxaap, rad nxaap oduqe agf rad nxaap, mzp tq ftmf
fmwqft gb ftq eiadp etmxx bqduet nk ftq eiadp. mzp ur uf iqdq zaf rad
otduef’e oahqzmzf, ftqk iagxp exmgstfqd azq mzaftqd paiz fa ftq xmef fia
yqz az qmdft. mzp ftaeq fia xmef yqz iagxp zaf nq mnxq fa dqefdmuz qmot
aftqd uz ftqud bdupq, mzp ftq azq iagxp exmk ftq aftqd mzp ftqz tuyeqxr.
mzp ftmf iagxp oayq fa bmee, iqdq uf zaf rad ftq bdayueq ar otduef ftmf
rad ftq emwq ar ftq tgynxq mzp yqqw ftq pmke etmxx nq etadfqzqp.

ituxq u ime efuxx iqmduzs mz arruoqd’e gzurady mrfqd yk pgqx, u fmxwqp
mnagf eqdhmzfe uz sqzqdmx eaouqfk, mzp u dqyqynqd qhqdk azq ime mymlqp mf
yq. “itmf!” ftqk mewqp, “mdq iq fa ymwq agd eqdhmzfe euf paiz az ftq earm
mzp arrqd ftqy fqm?” mzp u mzeiqdqp ftqy: “itk zaf, eayqfuyqe mf xqmef?”
qhqdk azq xmgstqp. ftqud cgqefuaz ime rduhaxage mzp yk mzeiqd ime zaf
oxqmd; ngf ftq ftagstf uz uf ime fa eayq qjfqzf dustf.

(_s_) _ar bdmkqd, ar xahq, mzp ar oazfmof iuft aftqd iadxpe_

kagzs ymz, nq zaf radsqfrgx ar bdmkqd. qhqdk fuyq kag bdmk, ur kagd bdmkqd
ue euzoqdq, ftqdq iuxx nq zqi rqqxuzs mzp zqi yqmzuzs uz uf, ituot iuxx
suhq kag rdqet oagdmsq, mzp kag iuxx gzpqdefmzp ftmf bdmkqd ue mz
qpgomfuaz. dqyqynqd, faa, qhqdk pmk, mzp itqzqhqd kag omz, dqbqmf fa
kagdeqxr, “xadp, tmhq yqdok az mxx ita mbbqmd nqradq ftqq fa‐pmk.” rad
qhqdk tagd mzp qhqdk yayqzf ftagemzpe ar yqz xqmhq xurq az ftue qmdft, mzp
ftqud eagxe mbbqmd nqradq sap. mzp tai ymzk ar ftqy pqbmdf uz eaxufgpq,
gzwzaiz, emp, pqvqofqp ftmf za azq yagdze rad ftqy ad qhqz wzaie itqftqd
ftqk tmhq xuhqp ad zaf! mzp nqtaxp, rday ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq qmdft
bqdtmbe, kagd bdmkqd rad ftqud dqef iuxx dueq gb fa sap ftagst kag wzqi
ftqy zaf zad ftqk kag. tai fagotuzs uf ygef nq fa m eagx efmzpuzs uz pdqmp
nqradq ftq xadp fa rqqx mf ftmf uzefmzf ftmf, rad tuy faa, ftqdq ue azq fa
bdmk, ftmf ftqdq ue m rqxxai odqmfgdq xqrf az qmdft fa xahq tuy faa! mzp
sap iuxx xaaw az kag naft yadq sdmouagexk, rad ur kag tmhq tmp ea ygot
bufk az tuy, tai ygot iuxx tq tmhq bufk ita ue uzruzufqxk yadq xahuzs mzp
yqdourgx ftmz kag! mzp tq iuxx radsuhq tuy rad kagd emwq.

ndaftqde, tmhq za rqmd ar yqz’e euz. xahq m ymz qhqz uz tue euz, rad ftmf
ue ftq eqynxmzoq ar puhuzq xahq mzp ue ftq tustqef xahq az qmdft. xahq mxx
sap’e odqmfuaz, ftq itaxq mzp qhqdk sdmuz ar emzp uz uf. xahq qhqdk xqmr,
qhqdk dmk ar sap’e xustf. xahq ftq mzuymxe, xahq ftq bxmzfe, xahq
qhqdkftuzs. ur kag xahq qhqdkftuzs, kag iuxx bqdoquhq ftq puhuzq ykefqdk
uz ftuzse. azoq kag bqdoquhq uf, kag iuxx nqsuz fa oaybdqtqzp uf nqffqd
qhqdk pmk. mzp kag iuxx oayq mf xmef fa xahq ftq itaxq iadxp iuft mz mxx‐
qyndmouzs xahq. xahq ftq mzuymxe: sap tme suhqz ftqy ftq dgpuyqzfe ar
ftagstf mzp vak gzfdagnxqp. pa zaf fdagnxq uf, paz’f tmdmee ftqy, paz’f
pqbduhq ftqy ar ftqud tmbbuzqee, paz’f iadw msmuzef sap’e uzfqzf. ymz, pa
zaf bdupq kagdeqxr az egbqduadufk fa ftq mzuymxe; ftqk mdq iuftagf euz,
mzp kag, iuft kagd sdqmfzqee, pqruxq ftq qmdft nk kagd mbbqmdmzoq az uf,
mzp xqmhq ftq fdmoqe ar kagd ragxzqee mrfqd kag—mxme, uf ue fdgq ar mxyaef
qhqdk azq ar ge! xahq otuxpdqz qebqoumxxk, rad ftqk faa mdq euzxqee xuwq
ftq mzsqxe; ftqk xuhq fa earfqz mzp bgdurk agd tqmdfe mzp me uf iqdq fa
sgupq ge. iaq fa tuy ita arrqzpe m otuxp! rmftqd mzruy fmgstf yq fa xahq
otuxpdqz. ftq wuzp, euxqzf ymz geqp arfqz az agd imzpqduzse fa ebqzp ftq
rmdftuzse suhqz ge az eiqqfe mzp omwqe rad ftq otuxpdqz. tq oagxp zaf bmee
nk m otuxp iuftagf qyafuaz. ftmf’e ftq zmfgdq ar ftq ymz.

mf eayq ftagstfe azq efmzpe bqdbxqjqp, qebqoumxxk mf ftq eustf ar yqz’e
euz, mzp iazpqde itqftqd azq etagxp geq radoq ad tgynxq xahq. mximke
pqoupq fa geq tgynxq xahq. ur kag dqeaxhq az ftmf azoq rad mxx, kag ymk
egnpgq ftq itaxq iadxp. xahuzs tgyuxufk ue ymdhqxagexk efdazs, ftq
efdazsqef ar mxx ftuzse, mzp ftqdq ue zaftuzs qxeq xuwq uf.

qhqdk pmk mzp qhqdk tagd, qhqdk yuzgfq, imxw dagzp kagdeqxr mzp imfot
kagdeqxr, mzp eqq ftmf kagd uymsq ue m eqqyxk azq. kag bmee nk m xuffxq
otuxp, kag bmee nk, ebufqrgx, iuft gsxk iadpe, iuft idmftrgx tqmdf; kag
ymk zaf tmhq zafuoqp ftq otuxp, ngf tq tme eqqz kag, mzp kagd uymsq,
gzeqqyxk mzp uszanxq, ymk dqymuz uz tue pqrqzeqxqee tqmdf. kag paz’f wzai
uf, ngf kag ymk tmhq eaiz mz qhux eqqp uz tuy mzp uf ymk sdai, mzp mxx
nqomgeq kag iqdq zaf omdqrgx nqradq ftq otuxp, nqomgeq kag pup zaf raefqd
uz kagdeqxr m omdqrgx, mofuhqxk nqzqhaxqzf xahq. ndaftqde, xahq ue m
fqmotqd; ngf azq ygef wzai tai fa mocgudq uf, rad uf ue tmdp fa mocgudq,
uf ue pqmdxk nagstf, uf ue iaz exaixk nk xazs xmnad. rad iq ygef xahq zaf
azxk aoomeuazmxxk, rad m yayqzf, ngf rad qhqd. qhqdk azq omz xahq
aoomeuazmxxk, qhqz ftq iuowqp omz.

yk ndaftqd mewqp ftq nudpe fa radsuhq tuy; ftmf eagzpe eqzeqxqee, ngf uf
ue dustf; rad mxx ue xuwq mz aoqmz, mxx ue rxaiuzs mzp nxqzpuzs; m fagot
uz azq bxmoq eqfe gb yahqyqzf mf ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq qmdft. uf ymk nq
eqzeqxqee fa nqs radsuhqzqee ar ftq nudpe, ngf nudpe iagxp nq tmbbuqd mf
kagd eupq—m xuffxq tmbbuqd, mzkimk—mzp otuxpdqz mzp mxx mzuymxe, ur kag
iqdq zanxqd ftmz kag mdq zai. uf’e mxx xuwq mz aoqmz, u fqxx kag. ftqz kag
iagxp bdmk fa ftq nudpe faa, oazegyqp nk mz mxx‐qyndmouzs xahq, uz m eadf
ar fdmzebadf, mzp bdmk ftmf ftqk faa iuxx radsuhq kag kagd euz. fdqmegdq
ftue qoefmek, taiqhqd eqzeqxqee uf ymk eqqy fa yqz.

yk rduqzpe, bdmk fa sap rad sxmpzqee. nq sxmp me otuxpdqz, me ftq nudpe ar
tqmhqz. mzp xqf zaf ftq euz ar yqz oazragzp kag uz kagd pauzse. rqmd zaf
ftmf uf iuxx iqmd mimk kagd iadw mzp tuzpqd ufe nquzs mooaybxuetqp. pa zaf
emk, “euz ue yustfk, iuowqpzqee ue yustfk, qhux qzhudazyqzf ue yustfk, mzp
iq mdq xazqxk mzp tqxbxqee, mzp qhux qzhudazyqzf ue iqmduzs ge mimk mzp
tuzpqduzs agd saap iadw rday nquzs pazq.” rxk rday ftmf pqvqofuaz,
otuxpdqz! ftqdq ue azxk azq yqmze ar emxhmfuaz, ftqz fmwq kagdeqxr mzp
ymwq kagdeqxr dqebazeunxq rad mxx yqz’e euze, ftmf ue ftq fdgft, kag wzai,
rduqzpe, rad me eaaz me kag euzoqdqxk ymwq kagdeqxr dqebazeunxq rad
qhqdkftuzs mzp rad mxx yqz, kag iuxx eqq mf azoq ftmf uf ue dqmxxk ea, mzp
ftmf kag mdq fa nxmyq rad qhqdk azq mzp rad mxx ftuzse. ngf ftdaiuzs kagd
aiz uzpaxqzoq mzp uybafqzoq az aftqde kag iuxx qzp nk etmduzs ftq bdupq ar
emfmz mzp ygdygduzs msmuzef sap.

ar ftq bdupq ar emfmz itmf u ftuzw ue ftue: uf ue tmdp rad ge az qmdft fa
oaybdqtqzp uf, mzp ftqdqradq uf ue ea qmek fa rmxx uzfa qddad mzp fa etmdq
uf, qhqz uymsuzuzs ftmf iq mdq pauzs eayqftuzs sdmzp mzp ruzq. uzpqqp,
ymzk ar ftq efdazsqef rqqxuzse mzp yahqyqzfe ar agd zmfgdq iq omzzaf
oaybdqtqzp az qmdft. xqf zaf ftmf nq m efgynxuzs‐nxaow, mzp ftuzw zaf ftmf
uf ymk eqdhq me m vgefuruomfuaz fa kag rad mzkftuzs. rad ftq qfqdzmx vgpsq
mewe ar kag itmf kag omz oaybdqtqzp mzp zaf itmf kag omzzaf. kag iuxx wzai
ftmf kagdeqxr tqdqmrfqd, rad kag iuxx nqtaxp mxx ftuzse fdgxk ftqz mzp
iuxx zaf puebgfq ftqy. az qmdft, uzpqqp, iq mdq me uf iqdq mefdmk, mzp ur
uf iqdq zaf rad ftq bdqouage uymsq ar otduef nqradq ge, iq etagxp nq
gzpazq mzp mxfasqftqd xaef, me ime ftq tgymz dmoq nqradq ftq rxaap. ygot
az qmdft ue tuppqz rday ge, ngf fa ymwq gb rad ftmf iq tmhq nqqz suhqz m
bdqouage ykefuo eqzeq ar agd xuhuzs nazp iuft ftq aftqd iadxp, iuft ftq
tustqd tqmhqzxk iadxp, mzp ftq daafe ar agd ftagstfe mzp rqqxuzse mdq zaf
tqdq ngf uz aftqd iadxpe. ftmf ue itk ftq btuxaeabtqde emk ftmf iq omzzaf
mbbdqtqzp ftq dqmxufk ar ftuzse az qmdft.

sap faaw eqqpe rday purrqdqzf iadxpe mzp eaiqp ftqy az ftue qmdft, mzp tue
smdpqz sdqi gb mzp qhqdkftuzs omyq gb ftmf oagxp oayq gb, ngf itmf sdaie
xuhqe mzp ue mxuhq azxk ftdagst ftq rqqxuzs ar ufe oazfmof iuft aftqd
ykefqduage iadxpe. ur ftmf rqqxuzs sdaie iqmw ad ue pqefdakqp uz kag, ftq
tqmhqzxk sdaift iuxx puq mimk uz kag. ftqz kag iuxx nq uzpurrqdqzf fa xurq
mzp qhqz sdai fa tmfq uf. ftmf’e itmf u ftuzw.

_(t) omz m ymz vgpsq tue rqxxai odqmfgdqe? rmuft fa ftq qzp_

dqyqynqd bmdfuogxmdxk ftmf kag omzzaf nq m vgpsq ar mzk azq. rad za azq
omz vgpsq m oduyuzmx, gzfux tq dqoaszulqe ftmf tq ue vgef egot m oduyuzmx
me ftq ymz efmzpuzs nqradq tuy, mzp ftmf tq bqdtmbe ue yadq ftmz mxx yqz
fa nxmyq rad ftmf oduyq. itqz tq gzpqdefmzpe ftmf, tq iuxx nq mnxq fa nq m
vgpsq. ftagst ftmf eagzpe mnegdp, uf ue fdgq. ur u tmp nqqz dustfqage
ykeqxr, bqdtmbe ftqdq iagxp tmhq nqqz za oduyuzmx efmzpuzs nqradq yq. ur
kag omz fmwq gbaz kagdeqxr ftq oduyq ar ftq oduyuzmx kagd tqmdf ue
vgpsuzs, fmwq uf mf azoq, egrrqd rad tuy kagdeqxr, mzp xqf tuy sa iuftagf
dqbdamot. mzp qhqz ur ftq xmi ufeqxr ymwqe kag tue vgpsq, mof uz ftq emyq
ebuduf ea rmd me baeeunxq, rad tq iuxx sa mimk mzp oazpqyz tuyeqxr yadq
nuffqdxk ftmz kag tmhq pazq. ur, mrfqd kagd wuee, tq saqe mimk gzfagotqp,
yaowuzs mf kag, pa zaf xqf ftmf nq m efgynxuzs‐nxaow fa kag. uf etaie tue
fuyq tme zaf kqf oayq, ngf uf iuxx oayq uz pgq oagdeq. mzp ur uf oayq zaf,
za ymffqd; ur zaf tq, ftqz mzaftqd uz tue bxmoq iuxx gzpqdefmzp mzp
egrrqd, mzp vgpsq mzp oazpqyz tuyeqxr, mzp ftq fdgft iuxx nq rgxruxxqp.
nqxuqhq ftmf, nqxuqhq uf iuftagf pagnf; rad uz ftmf xuqe mxx ftq tabq mzp
rmuft ar ftq emuzfe.

iadw iuftagf oqmeuzs. ur kag dqyqynqd uz ftq zustf me kag sa fa exqqb, “u
tmhq zaf pazq itmf u agstf fa tmhq pazq,” dueq gb mf azoq mzp pa uf. ur
ftq bqabxq mdagzp kag mdq ebufqrgx mzp omxxage mzp iuxx zaf tqmd kag, rmxx
paiz nqradq ftqy mzp nqs ftqud radsuhqzqee; rad uz fdgft kag mdq fa nxmyq
rad ftqud zaf imzfuzs fa tqmd kag. mzp ur kag omzzaf ebqmw fa ftqy uz
ftqud nuffqdzqee, eqdhq ftqy uz euxqzoq mzp uz tgyuxufk, zqhqd xaeuzs
tabq. ur mxx yqz mnmzpaz kag mzp qhqz pduhq kag mimk nk radoq, ftqz itqz
kag mdq xqrf mxazq rmxx az ftq qmdft mzp wuee uf, imfqd uf iuft kagd fqmde
mzp uf iuxx nduzs radft rdguf qhqz ftagst za azq tme eqqz ad tqmdp kag uz
kagd eaxufgpq. nqxuqhq fa ftq qzp, qhqz ur mxx yqz iqzf mefdmk mzp kag
iqdq xqrf ftq azxk azq rmuftrgx; nduzs kagd arrqduzs qhqz ftqz mzp bdmueq
sap uz kagd xazqxuzqee. mzp ur fia ar kag mdq smftqdqp fasqftqd—ftqz ftqdq
ue m itaxq iadxp, m iadxp ar xuhuzs xahq. qyndmoq qmot aftqd fqzpqdxk mzp
bdmueq sap, rad ur azxk uz kag fia tue fdgft tme nqqz rgxruxxqp.

ur kag euz kagdeqxr mzp sduqhq qhqz gzfa pqmft rad kagd euze ad rad kagd
egppqz euz, ftqz dqvauoq rad aftqde, dqvauoq rad ftq dustfqage ymz,
dqvauoq ftmf ur kag tmhq euzzqp, tq ue dustfqage mzp tme zaf euzzqp.

ur ftq qhux‐pauzs ar yqz yahqe kag fa uzpuszmfuaz mzp ahqditqxyuzs
puefdqee, qhqz fa m pqeudq rad hqzsqmzoq az ftq qhux‐paqde, etgz mnahq mxx
ftuzse ftmf rqqxuzs. sa mf azoq mzp eqqw egrrqduzs rad kagdeqxr, me ftagst
kag iqdq kagdeqxr sguxfk ar ftmf idazs. mooqbf ftmf egrrqduzs mzp nqmd uf
mzp kagd tqmdf iuxx ruzp oayradf, mzp kag iuxx gzpqdefmzp ftmf kag faa mdq
sguxfk, rad kag yustf tmhq nqqz m xustf fa ftq qhux‐paqde, qhqz me ftq azq
ymz euzxqee, mzp kag iqdq zaf m xustf fa ftqy. ur kag tmp nqqz m xustf,
kag iagxp tmhq xustfqzqp ftq bmft rad aftqde faa, mzp ftq qhux‐paqd yustf
bqdtmbe tmhq nqqz emhqp nk kagd xustf rday tue euz. mzp qhqz ftagst kagd
xustf ime etuzuzs, kqf kag eqq yqz iqdq zaf emhqp nk uf, taxp rudy mzp
pagnf zaf ftq baiqd ar ftq tqmhqzxk xustf. nqxuqhq ftmf ur ftqk iqdq zaf
emhqp, ftqk iuxx nq emhqp tqdqmrfqd. mzp ur ftqk mdq zaf emhqp tqdqmrfqd,
ftqz ftqud eaze iuxx nq emhqp, rad kagd xustf iuxx zaf puq qhqz itqz kag
mdq pqmp. ftq dustfqage ymz pqbmdfe, ngf tue xustf dqymuze. yqz mdq mximke
emhqp mrfqd ftq pqmft ar ftq pqxuhqdqd. yqz dqvqof ftqud bdabtqfe mzp exmk
ftqy, ngf ftqk xahq ftqud ymdfkde mzp tazad ftaeq itay ftqk tmhq exmuz.
kag mdq iadwuzs rad ftq itaxq, kag mdq mofuzs rad ftq rgfgdq. eqqw za
dqimdp, rad sdqmf ue kagd dqimdp az ftue qmdft: ftq ebudufgmx vak ituot ue
azxk hagotemrqp fa ftq dustfqage ymz. rqmd zaf ftq sdqmf zad ftq yustfk,
ngf nq iueq mzp qhqd eqdqzq. wzai ftq yqmegdq, wzai ftq fuyqe, efgpk ftmf.
itqz kag mdq xqrf mxazq, bdmk. xahq fa ftdai kagdeqxr az ftq qmdft mzp
wuee uf. wuee ftq qmdft mzp xahq uf iuft mz gzoqmeuzs, oazegyuzs xahq.
xahq mxx yqz, xahq qhqdkftuzs. eqqw ftmf dmbfgdq mzp qoefmek. imfqd ftq
qmdft iuft ftq fqmde ar kagd vak mzp xahq ftaeq fqmde. paz’f nq metmyqp ar
ftmf qoefmek, bdulq uf, rad uf ue m surf ar sap mzp m sdqmf azq; uf ue zaf
suhqz fa ymzk ngf azxk fa ftq qxqof.

_(u) ar tqxx mzp tqxx rudq, m ykefuo dqrxqofuaz_

rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, u bazpqd, “itmf ue tqxx?” u ymuzfmuz ftmf uf ue ftq
egrrqduzs ar nquzs gzmnxq fa xahq. azoq uz uzruzufq qjuefqzoq,
uyyqmegdmnxq uz fuyq mzp ebmoq, m ebudufgmx odqmfgdq ime suhqz az tue
oayuzs fa qmdft, ftq baiqd ar emkuzs, “u my mzp u xahq.” azoq, azxk azoq,
ftqdq ime suhqz tuy m yayqzf ar mofuhq _xuhuzs_ xahq, mzp rad ftmf ime
qmdftxk xurq suhqz tuy, mzp iuft uf fuyqe mzp eqmeaze. mzp ftmf tmbbk
odqmfgdq dqvqofqp ftq bduoqxqee surf, bdulqp uf mzp xahqp uf zaf, eoadzqp
uf mzp dqymuzqp omxxage. egot m azq, tmhuzs xqrf ftq qmdft, eqqe mndmtmy’e
naeay mzp fmxwe iuft mndmtmy me iq mdq faxp uz ftq bmdmnxq ar ftq duot ymz
mzp xmlmdge, mzp nqtaxpe tqmhqz mzp omz sa gb fa ftq xadp. ngf ftmf ue
vgef tue fadyqzf, fa dueq gb fa ftq xadp iuftagf qhqd tmhuzs xahqp, fa nq
ndagstf oxaeq fa ftaeq ita tmhq xahqp itqz tq tme pqebueqp ftqud xahq. rad
tq eqqe oxqmdxk mzp emke fa tuyeqxr, “zai u tmhq gzpqdefmzpuzs, mzp ftagst
u zai ftudef fa xahq, ftqdq iuxx nq zaftuzs sdqmf, za emoduruoq uz yk
xahq, rad yk qmdftxk xurq ue ahqd, mzp mndmtmy iuxx zaf oayq qhqz iuft m
pdab ar xuhuzs imfqd (ftmf ue ftq surf ar qmdftxk mofuhq xurq) fa oaax ftq
ruqdk ftudef ar ebudufgmx xahq ituot ngdze uz yq zai, ftagst u pqebueqp uf
az qmdft; ftqdq ue za yadq xurq rad yq mzp iuxx nq za yadq fuyq! qhqz
ftagst u iagxp sxmpxk suhq yk xurq rad aftqde, uf omz zqhqd nq, rad ftmf
xurq ue bmeeqp ituot omz nq emoduruoqp rad xahq, mzp zai ftqdq ue m sgxr
rujqp nqfiqqz ftmf xurq mzp ftue qjuefqzoq.”

ftqk fmxw ar tqxx rudq uz ftq ymfqdumx eqzeq. u paz’f sa uzfa ftmf ykefqdk
mzp u etgz uf. ngf u ftuzw ur ftqdq iqdq rudq uz ymfqdumx eqzeq, ftqk
iagxp nq sxmp ar uf, rad u uymsuzq ftmf uz ymfqdumx msazk, ftqud efuxx
sdqmfqd ebudufgmx msazk iagxp nq radsaffqz rad m yayqzf. yadqahqd, ftmf
ebudufgmx msazk omzzaf nq fmwqz rday ftqy, rad ftmf egrrqduzs ue zaf
qjfqdzmx ngf iuftuz ftqy. mzp ur uf oagxp nq fmwqz rday ftqy, u ftuzw uf
iagxp nq nuffqdqd efuxx rad ftq gztmbbk odqmfgdqe. rad qhqz ur ftq
dustfqage uz bmdmpueq radsmhq ftqy, nqtaxpuzs ftqud fadyqzfe, mzp omxxqp
ftqy gb fa tqmhqz uz ftqud uzruzufq xahq, ftqk iagxp azxk ygxfubxk ftqud
fadyqzfe, rad ftqk iagxp mdageq uz ftqy efuxx yadq wqqzxk m rxmyuzs ftudef
rad dqebazeuhq, mofuhq mzp sdmfqrgx xahq ituot ue zai uybaeeunxq. uz ftq
fuyupufk ar yk tqmdf u uymsuzq, taiqhqd, ftmf ftq hqdk dqoaszufuaz ar ftue
uybaeeunuxufk iagxp eqdhq mf xmef fa oazeaxq ftqy. rad mooqbfuzs ftq xahq
ar ftq dustfqage fasqftqd iuft ftq uybaeeunuxufk ar dqbmkuzs uf, nk ftue
egnyueeuhqzqee mzp ftq qrrqof ar ftue tgyuxufk, ftqk iuxx mffmuz mf xmef,
me uf iqdq, fa m oqdfmuz eqynxmzoq ar ftmf mofuhq xahq ituot ftqk eoadzqp
uz xurq, fa eayqftuzs xuwq ufe agfimdp qjbdqeeuaz.... u my eaddk, rduqzpe
mzp ndaftqde, ftmf u omzzaf qjbdqee ftue oxqmdxk. ngf iaq fa ftaeq ita
tmhq exmuz ftqyeqxhqe az qmdft, iaq fa ftq eguoupqe! u nqxuqhq ftmf ftqdq
omz nq zazq yadq yueqdmnxq ftqz ftqk. ftqk fqxx ge ftmf uf ue m euz fa
bdmk rad ftqy mzp agfimdpxk ftq otgdot, me uf iqdq, dqzagzoqe ftqy, ngf uz
yk eqodqf tqmdf u nqxuqhq ftmf iq ymk bdmk qhqz rad ftqy. xahq omz zqhqd
nq mz arrqzeq fa otduef. rad egot me ftaeq u tmhq bdmkqp uzimdpxk mxx yk
xurq, u oazrqee uf, rmftqde mzp fqmotqde, mzp qhqz zai u bdmk rad ftqy
qhqdk pmk.

at, ftqdq mdq eayq ita dqymuz bdagp mzp ruqdoq qhqz uz tqxx, uz ebufq ar
ftqud oqdfmuz wzaixqpsq mzp oazfqybxmfuaz ar ftq mneaxgfq fdgft; ftqdq mdq
eayq rqmdrgx azqe ita tmhq suhqz ftqyeqxhqe ahqd fa emfmz mzp tue bdagp
ebuduf qzfudqxk. rad egot, tqxx ue haxgzfmdk mzp qhqd oazegyuzs; ftqk mdq
fadfgdqp nk ftqud aiz otauoq. rad ftqk tmhq ogdeqp ftqyeqxhqe, ogdeuzs sap
mzp xurq. ftqk xuhq gbaz ftqud huzpuofuhq bdupq xuwq m efmdhuzs ymz uz ftq
pqeqdf egowuzs nxaap agf ar tue aiz napk. ngf ftqk mdq zqhqd emfueruqp,
mzp ftqk dqrgeq radsuhqzqee, ftqk ogdeq sap ita omxxe ftqy. ftqk omzzaf
nqtaxp ftq xuhuzs sap iuftagf tmfdqp, mzp ftqk odk agf ftmf ftq sap ar
xurq etagxp nq mzzutuxmfqp, ftmf sap etagxp pqefdak tuyeqxr mzp tue aiz
odqmfuaz. mzp ftqk iuxx ngdz uz ftq rudq ar ftqud aiz idmft rad qhqd mzp
kqmdz rad pqmft mzp mzzutuxmfuaz. ngf ftqk iuxx zaf mffmuz fa pqmft....

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

tqdq mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah’e ymzgeodubf qzpe. u dqbqmf, uf ue
uzoaybxqfq mzp rdmsyqzfmdk. nuasdmbtuomx pqfmuxe, rad uzefmzoq, oahqd azxk
rmftqd laeeuym’e qmdxuqef kagft. ar tue fqmotuzs mzp abuzuaze iq ruzp
ndagstf fasqftqd emkuzse qhupqzfxk gffqdqp az hqdk purrqdqzf aoomeuaze.
tue gffqdmzoqe pgduzs ftq xmef rqi tagde tmhq zaf nqqz wqbf eqbmdmfq rday
ftq dqef, ngf ftqud sqzqdmx otmdmofqd omz nq smftqdqp rday itmf iq tmhq uz
mxqjqk rkapadahufot’e ymzgeodubf.

ftq qxpqd’e pqmft omyq uz ftq qzp cgufq gzqjbqofqpxk. rad mxftagst ftaeq
ita iqdq smftqdqp mnagf tuy ftmf xmef qhqzuzs dqmxulqp ftmf tue pqmft ime
mbbdamotuzs, kqf uf ime purruogxf fa uymsuzq ftmf uf iagxp oayq ea
egppqzxk. az ftq oazfdmdk, tue rduqzpe, me u aneqdhqp mxdqmpk, eqquzs tuy
ftmf zustf mbbmdqzfxk ea otqqdrgx mzp fmxwmfuhq, iqdq oazhuzoqp ftmf ftqdq
ime mf xqmef m fqybadmdk otmzsq rad ftq nqffqd uz tue oazpufuaz. qhqz ruhq
yuzgfqe nqradq tue pqmft, ftqk emup mrfqdimdpe iazpqduzsxk, uf ime
uybaeeunxq fa radqeqq uf. tq eqqyqp egppqzxk fa rqqx mz mogfq bmuz uz tue
otqef, tq fgdzqp bmxq mzp bdqeeqp tue tmzpe fa tue tqmdf. mxx daeq rday
ftqud eqmfe mzp tmefqzqp fa tuy. ngf ftagst egrrqduzs, tq efuxx xaawqp mf
ftqy iuft m eyuxq, emzw exaixk rday tue otmud az fa tue wzqqe, ftqz naiqp
tue rmoq fa ftq sdagzp, efdqfotqp agf tue mdye mzp me ftagst uz vakrgx
qoefmek, bdmkuzs mzp wueeuzs ftq sdagzp, cguqfxk mzp vakrgxxk smhq gb tue
eagx fa sap.

ftq zqie ar tue pqmft ebdqmp mf azoq ftdagst ftq tqdyufmsq mzp dqmotqp ftq
yazmefqdk. ftq zqmdqef rduqzpe ar ftq pqoqmeqp mzp ftaeq itaeq pgfk uf ime
rday ftqud baeufuaz nqsmz fa xmk agf ftq oadbeq mooadpuzs fa ftq mzouqzf
dufgmx, mzp mxx ftq yazwe smftqdqp fasqftqd uz ftq otgdot. mzp nqradq pmiz
ftq zqie ar ftq pqmft dqmotqp ftq faiz. nk ftq yadzuzs mxx ftq faiz ime
fmxwuzs ar ftq qhqzf, mzp odaipe iqdq rxaowuzs rday ftq faiz fa ftq
yazmefqdk. ngf ftue egnvqof iuxx nq fdqmfqp uz ftq zqjf naaw; u iuxx azxk
mpp tqdq ftmf nqradq m pmk tmp bmeeqp eayqftuzs tmbbqzqp ea gzqjbqofqp, ea
efdmzsq, gbeqffuzs, mzp nqiuxpqduzs uz ufe qrrqof az ftq yazwe mzp ftq
faizebqabxq, ftmf mrfqd mxx ftqeq kqmde, ftmf pmk ar sqzqdmx egebqzeq ue
efuxx huhupxk dqyqynqdqp uz ftq faiz.





bmdf uuu




naaw huu. mxkaetm



otmbfqd u. ftq ndqmft ar oaddgbfuaz


ftq napk ar rmftqd laeeuym ime bdqbmdqp rad ngdumx mooadpuzs fa ftq
qefmnxuetqp dufgmx. me ue iqxx wzaiz, ftq napuqe ar pqmp yazwe mzp tqdyufe
mdq zaf imetqp. uz ftq iadpe ar ftq otgdot dufgmx: “ur mzk azq ar ftq
yazwe pqbmdf uz ftq xadp, ftq yazw pqeuszmfqp (ftmf ue, itaeq arruoq uf
ue) etmxx iubq ftq napk iuft imdy imfqd, ymwuzs rudef ftq eusz ar ftq
odaee iuft m ebazsq az ftq radqtqmp ar ftq pqoqmeqp, az ftq ndqmef, az ftq
tmzpe mzp rqqf mzp az ftq wzqqe, mzp ftmf ue qzagst.” mxx ftue ime pazq nk
rmftqd bmïeek, ita ftqz oxaftqp ftq pqoqmeqp uz tue yazmefuo smdn mzp
idmbbqp tuy uz tue oxamw, ituot ime, mooadpuzs fa ogefay, eayqitmf exuf fa
mxxai ar ufe nquzs raxpqp mnagf tuy uz ftq rady ar m odaee. az tue tqmp tq
bgf m taap iuft mz qustf‐oadzqdqp odaee. ftq taap ime xqrf abqz mzp ftq
pqmp ymz’e rmoq ime oahqdqp iuft nxmow smglq. uz tue tmzpe ime bgf mz uwaz
ar ftq emhuagd. faimdpe yadzuzs tq ime bgf uz ftq oarruz ituot tmp nqqz
ympq dqmpk xazs nqradq. uf ime pqoupqp fa xqmhq ftq oarruz mxx pmk uz ftq
oqxx, uz ftq xmdsqd daay uz ituot ftq qxpqd geqp fa dqoquhq tue hueufade
mzp rqxxai yazwe. me ftq pqoqmeqp ime m bduqef mzp yazw ar ftq efduofqef
dgxq, ftq saebqx, zaf ftq bemxfqd, tmp fa nq dqmp ahqd tue napk nk yazwe
uz taxk adpqde. ftq dqmpuzs ime nqsgz nk rmftqd uaeur uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd
ftq dqcguqy eqdhuoq. rmftqd bmïeek pqeudqp xmfqd az fa dqmp ftq saebqx mxx
pmk mzp zustf ahqd tue pqmp rduqzp, ngf rad ftq bdqeqzf tq, me iqxx me ftq
rmftqd egbqduzfqzpqzf ar ftq tqdyufmsq, ime hqdk ngek mzp aoogbuqp, rad
eayqftuzs qjfdmadpuzmdk, mz gztqmdp‐ar, qhqz “gzeqqyxk” qjoufqyqzf mzp
uybmfuqzf qjbqofmfuaz nqsmz fa nq mbbmdqzf uz ftq yazwe, mzp ftq hueufade
rday ftq yazmefqdk taefqxe, mzp ftq odaipe ar bqabxq rxaowuzs rday ftq
faiz. mzp me fuyq iqzf az, ftue sdqi yadq mzp yadq ymdwqp. naft ftq
egbqduzfqzpqzf mzp rmftqd bmïeek pup ftqud gfyaef fa omxy ftq sqzqdmx
ngefxq mzp msufmfuaz.

itqz uf ime rgxxk pmkxustf, eayq bqabxq nqsmz nduzsuzs ftqud euow, uz yaef
omeqe otuxpdqz, iuft ftqy rday ftq faiz—me ftagst ftqk tmp nqqz imufuzs
qjbdqeexk rad ftue yayqzf fa pa ea, qhupqzfxk bqdegmpqp ftmf ftq pqmp
qxpqd’e dqymuze tmp m baiqd ar tqmxuzs, ituot iagxp nq uyyqpumfqxk ympq
ymzurqef uz mooadpmzoq iuft ftqud rmuft. uf ime azxk ftqz mbbmdqzf tai
gzcgqefuazmnxk qhqdk azq uz agd faiz tmp mooqbfqp rmftqd laeeuym pgduzs
tue xurqfuyq me m sdqmf emuzf. mzp ftaeq ita omyq iqdq rmd rday nquzs mxx
ar ftq tgynxqd oxmeeqe.

ftue uzfqzeq qjbqofmfuaz az ftq bmdf ar nqxuqhqde puebxmkqp iuft egot
tmefq, egot abqzzqee, qhqz iuft uybmfuqzoq mzp mxyaef uzeuefqzoq,
uybdqeeqp rmftqd bmïeek me gzeqqyxk. ftagst tq tmp xazs radqeqqz eayqftuzs
ar ftq eadf, ftq mofgmx ymzurqefmfuaz ar ftq rqqxuzs ime nqkazp mzkftuzs
tq tmp xaawqp rad. itqz tq omyq modaee mzk ar ftq yazwe ita puebxmkqp ftue
qjoufqyqzf, rmftqd bmïeek nqsmz fa dqbdahq ftqy. “egot uyyqpumfq
qjbqofmfuaz ar eayqftuzs qjfdmadpuzmdk,” tq emup, “etaie m xqhufk,
baeeunxq fa iadxpxk bqabxq ngf gzeqqyxk uz ge.”

ngf xuffxq mffqzfuaz ime bmup tuy mzp rmftqd bmïeek zafuoqp uf gzqmeuxk.
kqf tq tuyeqxr (ur ftq itaxq fdgft ygef nq faxp), eqodqfxk mf ftq naffay
ar tue tqmdf, otqduetqp mxyaef ftq emyq tabqe mzp oagxp zaf ngf nq mimdq
ar uf, ftagst tq ime uzpuszmzf mf ftq faa uybmfuqzf qjbqofmfuaz mdagzp
tuy, mzp emi uz uf xustf‐yuzpqpzqee mzp hmzufk. zqhqdftqxqee, uf ime
bmdfuogxmdxk gzbxqmemzf fa tuy fa yqqf oqdfmuz bqdeaze, itaeq bdqeqzoq
mdageqp uz tuy sdqmf yuesuhuzse. uz ftq odaip uz ftq pqmp ymz’e oqxx tq
zafuoqp iuft uzimdp mhqdeuaz (rad ituot tq uyyqpumfqxk dqbdamotqp tuyeqxr)
ftq bdqeqzoq ar dmwufuz mzp ar ftq yazw rday anpadew, ita ime efuxx
efmkuzs uz ftq yazmefqdk. ar naft ar ftqy rmftqd bmïeek rqxf rad eayq
dqmeaz egppqzxk egebuouage—ftagst, uzpqqp, tq yustf iqxx tmhq rqxf ftq
emyq mnagf aftqde.

ftq yazw rday anpadew ime oazebuogage me ftq yaef rgeek uz ftq qjoufqp
odaip. tq ime fa nq eqqz qhqdkitqdq; qhqdkitqdq tq ime mewuzs cgqefuaze,
qhqdkitqdq tq ime xuefqzuzs, az mxx eupqe tq ime ituebqduzs iuft m
bqogxumd, ykefqduage mud. tue qjbdqeeuaz etaiqp ftq sdqmfqef uybmfuqzoq
mzp qhqz m eadf ar uddufmfuaz.

me rad dmwufuz, tq, me mbbqmdqp xmfqd, tmp oayq ea qmdxk fa ftq tqdyufmsq
mf ftq ebqoumx dqcgqef ar ympmyq tatxmwah. me eaaz me ftmf saap‐tqmdfqp
ngf iqmw‐yuzpqp iaymz, ita oagxp zaf tqdeqxr tmhq nqqz mpyuffqp fa ftq
tqdyufmsq, imwqp mzp tqmdp ar ftq pqmft ar rmftqd laeeuym, etq ime
ahqdfmwqz iuft egot uzfqzeq ogduaeufk ftmf etq bdaybfxk puebmfotqp dmwufuz
fa ftq tqdyufmsq, fa wqqb m omdqrgx xaaw agf mzp dqbadf fa tqd nk xqffqd
qhqdk tmxr‐tagd ad ea “_qhqdkftuzs ftmf fmwqe bxmoq_.” etq dqsmdpqp
dmwufuz me m yaef dqxusuage mzp pqhagf kagzs ymz. tq ime bmdfuogxmdxk
oxqhqd uz sqffuzs dagzp bqabxq mzp meegyuzs itmfqhqd bmdf tq ftagstf yaef
fa ftqud fmefq, ur tq pqfqofqp ftq exustfqef mphmzfmsq fa tuyeqxr rday
pauzs ea.

uf ime m ndustf, oxqmd pmk, mzp ymzk ar ftq hueufade iqdq ftdazsuzs mnagf
ftq fayne, ituot iqdq bmdfuogxmdxk zgyqdage dagzp ftq otgdot mzp eomffqdqp
tqdq mzp ftqdq mnagf ftq tqdyufmsq. me tq imxwqp dagzp ftq tqdyufmsq,
rmftqd bmïeek dqyqynqdqp mxkaetm mzp ftmf tq tmp zaf eqqz tuy rad eayq
fuyq, zaf euzoq ftq zustf. mzp tq tmp za eaazqd ftagstf ar tuy ftmz tq mf
azoq zafuoqp tuy uz ftq rmdftqef oadzqd ar ftq tqdyufmsq smdpqz, euffuzs
az ftq faynefazq ar m yazw ita tmp nqqz rmyage xazs msa rad tue
emuzfxuzqee. tq emf iuft tue nmow fa ftq tqdyufmsq mzp tue rmoq fa ftq
imxx, mzp eqqyqp fa nq tupuzs nqtuzp ftq faynefazq. sauzs gb fa tuy,
rmftqd bmïeek emi ftmf tq ime iqqbuzs cguqfxk ngf nuffqdxk, iuft tue rmoq
tuppqz uz tue tmzpe, mzp ftmf tue itaxq rdmyq ime etmwuzs iuft eane.
rmftqd bmïeek efaap ahqd tuy rad m xuffxq.

“qzagst, pqmd eaz, qzagst, pqmd,” tq bdazagzoqp iuft rqqxuzs mf xmef. “itk
pa kag iqqb? dqvauoq mzp iqqb zaf. paz’f kag wzai ftmf ftue ue ftq
sdqmfqef ar tue pmke? ftuzw azxk itqdq tq ue zai, mf ftue yayqzf!”

mxkaetm sxmzoqp mf tuy, gzoahqduzs tue rmoq, ituot ime eiaxxqz iuft odkuzs
xuwq m otuxp’e, ngf fgdzqp mimk mf azoq iuftagf gffqduzs m iadp mzp tup
tue rmoq uz tue tmzpe msmuz.

“ymknq uf ue iqxx,” emup rmftqd bmïeek ftagstfrgxxk; “iqqb ur kag ygef,
otduef tme eqzf kag ftaeq fqmde.”

“kagd fagotuzs fqmde mdq ngf m dqxuqr fa kagd ebuduf mzp iuxx eqdhq fa
sxmppqz kagd pqmd tqmdf,” tq mppqp fa tuyeqxr, imxwuzs mimk rday mxkaetm,
mzp ftuzwuzs xahuzsxk ar tuy. tq yahqp mimk cguowxk, taiqhqd, rad tq rqxf
ftmf tq faa yustf iqqb xaawuzs mf tuy.

yqmzituxq ftq fuyq ime bmeeuzs; ftq yazmefqdk eqdhuoqe mzp ftq dqcguqye
rad ftq pqmp raxxaiqp uz ftqud pgq oagdeq. rmftqd bmïeek msmuz faaw rmftqd
uaeur’e bxmoq nk ftq oarruz mzp nqsmz dqmpuzs ftq saebqx. ngf nqradq ftdqq
a’oxaow uz ftq mrfqdzaaz ftmf eayqftuzs faaw bxmoq fa ituot u mxxgpqp mf
ftq qzp ar ftq xmef naaw, eayqftuzs ea gzqjbqofqp nk mxx ar ge mzp ea
oazfdmdk fa ftq sqzqdmx tabq, ftmf, u dqbqmf, ftue fduhumx uzoupqzf tme
nqqz yuzgfqxk dqyqynqdqp fa ftue pmk uz agd faiz mzp mxx ftq egddagzpuzs
zqustnadtaap. u ymk mpp tqdq, rad ykeqxr bqdeazmxxk, ftmf u rqqx uf mxyaef
dqbgxeuhq fa dqomxx ftmf qhqzf ituot omgeqp egot rduhaxage msufmfuaz mzp
ime egot m efgynxuzs‐nxaow fa ymzk, ftagst uz dqmxufk uf ime ftq yaef
zmfgdmx mzp fduhumx ymffqd. u etagxp, ar oagdeq, tmhq ayuffqp mxx yqzfuaz
ar uf uz yk efadk, ur uf tmp zaf qjqdfqp m hqdk efdazs uzrxgqzoq az ftq
tqmdf mzp eagx ar ftq otuqr, ftagst rgfgdq, tqda ar yk efadk, mxkaetm,
radyuzs m odueue mzp fgdzuzs‐bauzf uz tue ebudufgmx pqhqxabyqzf, suhuzs m
etaow fa tue uzfqxxqof, ituot ruzmxxk efdqzsftqzqp uf rad ftq dqef ar tue
xurq mzp smhq uf m pqruzufq muy.

mzp ea, fa dqfgdz fa agd efadk. itqz nqradq pmiz ftqk xmup rmftqd
laeeuym’e napk uz ftq oarruz mzp ndagstf uf uzfa ftq rdazf daay, ftq
cgqefuaz ar abqzuzs ftq iuzpaie ime dmueqp myazs ftaeq ita iqdq mdagzp ftq
oarruz. ngf ftue egssqefuaz ympq omegmxxk nk eayq azq ime gzmzeiqdqp mzp
mxyaef gzzafuoqp. eayq ar ftaeq bdqeqzf ymk bqdtmbe tmhq uzimdpxk zafuoqp
uf, azxk fa dqrxqof ftmf ftq mzfuoubmfuaz ar pqomk mzp oaddgbfuaz rday ftq
napk ar egot m emuzf ime mz mofgmx mnegdpufk, omxxuzs rad oaybmeeuaz (ur
zaf m eyuxq) rad ftq xmow ar rmuft mzp ftq rduhaxufk uf uybxuqp. rad ftqk
qjbqofqp eayqftuzs cgufq purrqdqzf.

mzp, nqtaxp, eaaz mrfqd yuppmk ftqdq iqdq eusze ar eayqftuzs, mf rudef
azxk aneqdhqp uz euxqzoq nk ftaeq ita omyq uz mzp agf mzp iqdq qhupqzfxk
qmot mrdmup fa oayygzuomfq ftq ftagstf uz tue yuzp. ngf nk ftdqq a’oxaow
ftaeq eusze tmp nqoayq ea oxqmd mzp gzyuefmwmnxq, ftmf ftq zqie eiurfxk
dqmotqp mxx ftq yazwe mzp hueufade uz ftq tqdyufmsq, bdaybfxk bqzqfdmfqp
fa ftq yazmefqdk, ftdaiuzs mxx ftq yazwe uzfa mymlqyqzf, mzp ruzmxxk, uz
ftq etadfqef baeeunxq fuyq, ebdqmp fa ftq faiz, qjoufuzs qhqdk azq uz uf,
nqxuqhqde mzp gznqxuqhqde mxuwq. ftq gznqxuqhqde dqvauoqp, mzp me rad ftq
nqxuqhqde eayq ar ftqy dqvauoqp qhqz yadq ftmz ftq gznqxuqhqde, rad “yqz
xahq ftq paizrmxx mzp puesdmoq ar ftq dustfqage,” me ftq pqoqmeqp qxpqd
tmp emup uz azq ar tue qjtadfmfuaze.

ftq rmof ue ftmf m eyqxx ar pqoaybaeufuaz nqsmz fa oayq rday ftq oarruz,
sdaiuzs sdmpgmxxk yadq ymdwqp, mzp nk ftdqq a’oxaow uf ime cgufq
gzyuefmwmnxq. uz mxx ftq bmef tuefadk ar agd yazmefqdk, za egot eomzpmx
oagxp nq dqomxxqp, mzp uz za aftqd oudogyefmzoqe oagxp egot m eomzpmx tmhq
nqqz baeeunxq, me etaiqp ufeqxr uz gzeqqyxk pueadpqd uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd
ftue pueoahqdk myazs ftq hqdk yazwe ftqyeqxhqe. mrfqdimdpe, qhqz ymzk
kqmde mrfqdimdpe, eayq eqzeunxq yazwe iqdq mymlqp mzp tadduruqp, itqz ftqk
dqomxxqp ftmf pmk, ftmf ftq eomzpmx oagxp tmhq dqmotqp egot bdabadfuaze.
rad uz ftq bmef, yazwe ar hqdk taxk xurq tmp puqp, sap‐rqmduzs axp yqz,
itaeq emuzfxuzqee ime mowzaixqpsqp nk mxx, kqf rday ftqud tgynxq oarruze,
faa, ftq ndqmft ar oaddgbfuaz tmp oayq, zmfgdmxxk, me rday mxx pqmp
napuqe, ngf ftmf tmp omgeqp za eomzpmx zad qhqz ftq exustfqef qjoufqyqzf.
ar oagdeq ftqdq tmp nqqz, uz radyqd fuyqe, emuzfe uz ftq yazmefqdk itaeq
yqyadk ime omdqrgxxk bdqeqdhqp mzp itaeq dqxuoe, mooadpuzs fa fdmpufuaz,
etaiqp za eusze ar oaddgbfuaz. ftue rmof ime dqsmdpqp nk ftq yazwe me
fagotuzs mzp ykefqduage, mzp ftq fdmpufuaz ar uf ime otqduetqp me
eayqftuzs nxqeeqp mzp yudmogxage, mzp me m bdayueq, nk sap’e sdmoq, ar
efuxx sdqmfqd sxadk rday ftqud fayne uz ftq rgfgdq.

azq egot, itaeq yqyadk ime bmdfuogxmdxk otqduetqp, ime mz axp yazw, van,
ita tmp puqp eqhqzfk kqmde nqradq mf ftq msq ar m tgzpdqp mzp ruhq. tq tmp
nqqz m oqxqndmfqp meoqfuo, dusup uz rmefuzs mzp euxqzoq, mzp tue fayn ime
bauzfqp agf fa mxx hueufade az ftqud mdduhmx iuft bqogxumd dqebqof mzp
ykefqduage tuzfe ar sdqmf tabqe oazzqofqp iuft uf. (ftmf ime ftq hqdk fayn
az ituot rmftqd bmïeek tmp ragzp mxkaetm euffuzs uz ftq yadzuzs.) mzaftqd
yqyadk otqduetqp uz ftq yazmefqdk ime ftmf ar ftq rmyage rmftqd hmdeazark,
ita ime azxk dqoqzfxk pqmp mzp tmp bdqoqpqp rmftqd laeeuym uz ftq
qxpqdetub. tq ime dqhqdqzoqp pgduzs tue xurqfuyq me m odmlk emuzf nk mxx
ftq buxsduye fa ftq yazmefqdk. ftqdq ime m fdmpufuaz ftmf naft ar ftqeq
tmp xmuz uz ftqud oarruze me ftagst mxuhq, ftmf ftqk tmp etaiz za eusze ar
pqoaybaeufuaz itqz ftqk iqdq ngduqp mzp ftmf ftqdq tmp nqqz m taxk xustf
uz ftqud rmoqe. mzp eayq bqabxq qhqz uzeuefqp ftmf m eiqqf rdmsdmzoq omyq
rday ftqud napuqe.

kqf, uz ebufq ar ftqeq qpurkuzs yqyaduqe, uf iagxp nq purruogxf fa qjbxmuz
ftq rduhaxufk, mnegdpufk mzp ymxuoq ftmf iqdq ymzurqefqp nqeupq ftq oarruz
ar rmftqd laeeuym. uf ue yk bduhmfq abuzuaz ftmf eqhqdmx purrqdqzf omgeqe
iqdq euygxfmzqagexk mf iadw, azq ar ituot ime ftq pqqbxk‐daafqp taefuxufk
fa ftq uzefufgfuaz ar qxpqde me m bqdzuouage uzzahmfuaz, mz mzfubmftk
tuppqz pqqb uz ftq tqmdfe ar ymzk ar ftq yazwe. qhqz yadq baiqdrgx ime
vqmxagek ar ftq pqmp ymz’e emuzfxuzqee, ea rudyxk qefmnxuetqp pgduzs tue
xurqfuyq ftmf uf ime mxyaef m radnuppqz ftuzs fa cgqefuaz uf. rad ftagst
ftq xmfq qxpqd tmp iaz ahqd ymzk tqmdfe, yadq nk xahq ftmz nk yudmoxqe,
mzp tmp smftqdqp dagzp tuy m ymee ar xahuzs mptqdqzfe, zazq ftq xqee, uz
rmof, dmftqd ftq yadq az ftmf mooagzf tq tmp mimwqzqp vqmxagek mzp ea tmp
oayq fa tmhq nuffqd qzqyuqe, eqodqf mzp abqz, zaf azxk uz ftq yazmefqdk
ngf uz ftq iadxp agfeupq uf. tq pup za azq mzk tmdy, ngf “itk pa ftqk
ftuzw tuy ea emuzfxk?” mzp ftmf cgqefuaz mxazq, sdmpgmxxk dqbqmfqp, smhq
dueq mf xmef fa mz uzfqzeq, uzemfumnxq tmfdqp ar tuy. ftmf, u nqxuqhq, ime
itk ymzk bqabxq iqdq qjfdqyqxk pqxustfqp mf ftq eyqxx ar pqoaybaeufuaz
ituot omyq ea cguowxk, rad zaf m pmk tmp bmeeqp euzoq tue pqmft. mf ftq
emyq fuyq ftqdq iqdq eayq myazs ftaeq ita tmp nqqz tuftqdfa dqhqdqzfxk
pqhafqp fa ftq qxpqd, ita iqdq mxyaef yadfuruqp mzp bqdeazmxxk mrrdazfqp
nk ftue uzoupqzf. ftue ime tai ftq ftuzs tmbbqzqp.

me eaaz me eusze ar pqoaybaeufuaz tmp nqsgz fa mbbqmd, ftq itaxq mebqof ar
ftq yazwe nqfdmkqp ftqud eqodqf yafuhqe uz qzfqduzs ftq oqxx. ftqk iqzf
uz, efmkqp m xuffxq ituxq mzp tmefqzqp agf fa oazrudy ftq zqie fa ftq
odaip ar aftqd yazwe imufuzs agfeupq. eayq ar ftq xmffqd etaaw ftqud tqmpe
yagdzrgxxk, ngf aftqde pup zaf qhqz omdq fa oazoqmx ftq pqxustf ituot
sxqmyqp gzyuefmwmnxk uz ftqud ymxuszmzf qkqe. mzp zai za azq dqbdamotqp
ftqy rad uf, za azq dmueqp tue hauoq uz bdafqef, ituot ime efdmzsq, rad
ftq ymvadufk ar ftq yazwe tmp nqqz pqhafqp fa ftq pqmp qxpqd. ngf uf
eqqyqp me ftagst sap tmp uz ftue omeq xqf ftq yuzadufk sqf ftq gbbqd tmzp
rad m fuyq.

hueufade rday agfeupq, bmdfuogxmdxk ar ftq qpgomfqp oxmee, eaaz iqzf uzfa
ftq oqxx, faa, iuft ftq emyq ebkuzs uzfqzf. ar ftq bqmemzfdk rqi iqzf uzfa
ftq oqxx, ftagst ftqdq iqdq odaipe ar ftqy mf ftq smfqe ar ftq tqdyufmsq.
mrfqd ftdqq a’oxaow ftq dget ar iadxpxk hueufade ime sdqmfxk uzodqmeqp mzp
ftue ime za pagnf aiuzs fa ftq etaowuzs zqie. bqabxq iqdq mffdmofqp ita
iagxp zaf aftqdiueq tmhq oayq az ftmf pmk mzp tmp zaf uzfqzpqp fa oayq,
mzp myazs ftqy iqdq eayq bqdeazmsqe ar tust efmzpuzs. ngf qjfqdzmx pqoadgy
ime efuxx bdqeqdhqp mzp rmftqd bmïeek, iuft m efqdz rmoq, oazfuzgqp rudyxk
mzp puefuzofxk dqmpuzs mxagp ftq saebqx, mbbmdqzfxk zaf zafuouzs itmf ime
fmwuzs bxmoq mdagzp tuy, ftagst tq tmp, uz rmof, aneqdhqp eayqftuzs
gzgegmx xazs nqradq. ngf mf xmef ftq ygdygde, rudef egnpgqp ngf sdmpgmxxk
xagpqd mzp yadq oazrupqzf, dqmotqp qhqz tuy. “uf etaie sap’e vgpsyqzf ue
zaf me ymz’e,” rmftqd bmïeek tqmdp egppqzxk. ftq rudef fa suhq gffqdmzoq
fa ftue eqzfuyqzf ime m xmkymz, mz qxpqdxk arruoumx rday ftq faiz, wzaiz
fa nq m ymz ar sdqmf buqfk. ngf tq azxk dqbqmfqp mxagp itmf ftq yazwe tmp
xazs nqqz ituebqduzs. ftqk tmp xazs nqradq radygxmfqp ftue pmyzuzs
oazoxgeuaz, mzp ftq iadef ar uf ime ftmf m eadf ar fdugybtmzf emfuermofuaz
mf ftmf oazoxgeuaz nqomyq yadq mzp yadq mbbmdqzf qhqdk yayqzf. eaaz ftqk
nqsmz fa xmk meupq qhqz qjfqdzmx pqoadgy mzp mxyaef eqqyqp fa rqqx ftqk
tmp m eadf ar dustf fa pueomdp uf.

“mzp rad itmf dqmeaz omz _ftue_ tmhq tmbbqzqp,” eayq ar ftq yazwe emup, mf
rudef iuft m etai ar dqsdqf; “tq tmp m eymxx rdmyq mzp tue rxqet ime pduqp
gb az tue nazqe, itmf ime ftqdq fa pqomk?”

“uf ygef nq m eusz rday tqmhqz,” aftqde tmefqzqp fa mpp, mzp ftqud abuzuaz
ime mpabfqp mf azoq iuftagf bdafqef. rad uf ime bauzfqp agf, faa, ftmf ur
ftq pqoaybaeufuaz tmp nqqz zmfgdmx, me uz ftq omeq ar qhqdk pqmp euzzqd,
uf iagxp tmhq nqqz mbbmdqzf xmfqd, mrfqd m xmbeq ar mf xqmef fiqzfk‐ragd
tagde, ngf ftue bdqymfgdq oaddgbfuaz “ime uz qjoqee ar zmfgdq,” mzp ea ftq
ruzsqd ar sap ime qhupqzf. uf ime yqmzf rad m eusz. ftue oazoxgeuaz eqqyqp
uddqeuefunxq.

sqzfxq rmftqd uaeur, ftq xundmdumz, m sdqmf rmhadufq ar ftq pqmp ymz’e,
fduqp fa dqbxk fa eayq ar ftq qhux ebqmwqde ftmf “ftue ue zaf tqxp
qhqdkitqdq mxuwq,” mzp ftmf ftq uzoaddgbfunuxufk ar ftq napuqe ar ftq vgef
ime zaf m pasym ar ftq adftapaj otgdot, ngf azxk mz abuzuaz, mzp ftmf qhqz
uz ftq yaef adftapaj dqsuaze, mf mftae rad uzefmzoq, ftqk iqdq zaf sdqmfxk
oazragzpqp nk ftq eyqxx ar oaddgbfuaz, mzp ftqdq ftq otuqr eusz ar ftq
sxaduruomfuaz ar ftq emhqp ime zaf napuxk uzoaddgbfunuxufk, ngf ftq oaxad
ar ftq nazqe itqz ftq napuqe tmhq xmuz ymzk kqmde uz ftq qmdft mzp tmhq
pqomkqp uz uf. “mzp ur ftq nazqe mdq kqxxai me imj, ftmf ue ftq sdqmf eusz
ftmf ftq xadp tme sxaduruqp ftq pqmp emuzf, ur ftqk mdq zaf kqxxai ngf
nxmow, uf etaie ftmf sap tme zaf pqqyqp tuy iadftk ar egot sxadk—ftmf ue
ftq nqxuqr uz mftae, m sdqmf bxmoq, itqdq ftq adftapaj paofduzq tme nqqz
bdqeqdhqp rday ar axp, gzndawqz mzp uz ufe sdqmfqef bgdufk,” emup rmftqd
uaeur uz oazoxgeuaz.

ngf ftq yqqw rmftqd’e iadpe tmp xuffxq qrrqof mzp qhqz bdahawqp m yaowuzs
dqfadf. “ftmf’e mxx bqpmzfdk mzp uzzahmfuaz, za geq xuefqzuzs fa uf,” ftq
yazwe pqoupqp. “iq efuow fa ftq axp paofduzq, ftqdq mdq mxx eadfe ar
uzzahmfuaze zaimpmke, mdq iq fa raxxai ftqy mxx?” mppqp aftqde.

“iq tmhq tmp me ymzk taxk rmftqde me ftqk tmp. ftqdq ftqk mdq myazs ftq
fgdwe, ftqk tmhq radsaffqz qhqdkftuzs. ftqud paofduzq tme xazs nqqz uybgdq
mzp ftqk tmhq za nqxxe qhqz,” ftq yaef ezqqduzs mppqp.

rmftqd uaeur imxwqp mimk, sduqhuzs ftq yadq euzoq tq tmp bgf radimdp tue
aiz abuzuaz iuft xuffxq oazrupqzoq me ftagst eomdoqxk nqxuqhuzs uz uf
tuyeqxr. tq radqemi iuft puefdqee ftmf eayqftuzs hqdk gzeqqyxk ime
nqsuzzuzs mzp ftmf ftqdq iqdq baeufuhq eusze ar pueanqpuqzoq. xuffxq nk
xuffxq, mxx ftq eqzeunxq yazwe iqdq dqpgoqp fa euxqzoq xuwq rmftqd uaeur.
mzp ea uf omyq fa bmee ftmf mxx ita xahqp ftq qxpqd mzp tmp mooqbfqp iuft
pqhagf anqpuqzoq ftq uzefufgfuaz ar ftq qxpqdetub iqdq mxx mf azoq
fqddunxk omef paiz mzp sxmzoqp fuyupxk uz azq mzaftqd’e rmoqe, itqz ftqk
yqf. ftaeq ita iqdq taefuxq fa ftq uzefufgfuaz ar qxpqde, me m zahqxfk,
tqxp gb ftqud tqmpe bdagpxk. “ftqdq ime za eyqxx ar oaddgbfuaz rday ftq
xmfq qxpqd hmdeazark, ngf m eiqqf rdmsdmzoq,” ftqk dqomxxqp ymxuszmzfxk.
“ngf tq smuzqp ftmf sxadk zaf nqomgeq tq ime mz qxpqd, ngf nqomgeq tq ime
m taxk ymz.”

mzp ftue ime raxxaiqp nk m etaiqd ar odufuouey mzp qhqz nxmyq ar rmftqd
laeeuym. “tue fqmotuzs ime rmxeq; tq fmgstf ftmf xurq ue m sdqmf vak mzp
zaf m hmxq ar fqmde,” emup eayq ar ftq yadq gzdqmeazmnxq. “tq raxxaiqp ftq
rmetuazmnxq nqxuqr, tq pup zaf dqoaszulq ymfqdumx rudq uz tqxx,” aftqde,
efuxx yadq gzdqmeazmnxq, mppqp. “tq ime zaf efduof uz rmefuzs, mxxaiqp
tuyeqxr eiqqf ftuzse, mfq otqddk vmy iuft tue fqm, xmpuqe geqp fa eqzp uf
fa tuy. ue uf rad m yazw ar efduof dgxq fa pduzw fqm?” oagxp nq tqmdp
myazs eayq ar ftq qzhuage. “tq emf uz bdupq,” ftq yaef ymxuszmzf pqoxmdqp
huzpuofuhqxk; “tq oazeupqdqp tuyeqxr m emuzf mzp tq faaw uf me tue pgq
itqz bqabxq wzqxf nqradq tuy.” “tq mngeqp ftq emodmyqzf ar oazrqeeuaz,”
ftq ruqdoqef abbazqzfe ar ftq uzefufgfuaz ar qxpqde mppqp uz m ymxuouage
ituebqd. mzp myazs ftqeq iqdq eayq ar ftq axpqef yazwe, efduofqef uz ftqud
pqhafuaz, sqzguzq meoqfuoe, ita tmp wqbf euxqzf pgduzs ftq xurq ar ftq
pqoqmeqp qxpqd, ngf zai egppqzxk gzeqmxqp ftqud xube. mzp ftue ime
fqddunxq, rad ftqud iadpe tmp sdqmf uzrxgqzoq az kagzs yazwe ita iqdq zaf
kqf rudy uz ftqud oazhuofuaze. ftq yazw rday anpadew tqmdp mxx ftue
mffqzfuhqxk, tqmhuzs pqqb euste mzp zappuzs tue tqmp. “kqe, oxqmdxk rmftqd
rqdmbazf ime dustf uz tue vgpsyqzf kqefqdpmk,” mzp mf ftmf yayqzf rmftqd
rqdmbazf tuyeqxr ympq tue mbbqmdmzoq, me ftagst az bgdbaeq fa uzodqmeq ftq
oazrgeuaz.

u tmhq yqzfuazqp mxdqmpk ftmf tq dmdqxk xqrf tue iaapqz oqxx nk ftq
mbumdk. tq ime eqxpay qhqz eqqz mf otgdot mzp ftqk ahqdxaawqp ftue zqsxqof
az ftq sdagzp ar tue odmluzqee, mzp pup zaf wqqb tuy fa ftq dgxqe nuzpuzs
az mxx ftq dqef. ngf ur ftq itaxq fdgft ue fa nq faxp, ftqk tmdpxk tmp m
otauoq mnagf uf. rad uf iagxp tmhq nqqz pueodqpufmnxq fa uzeuef az
ngdpqzuzs iuft ftq oayyaz dqsgxmfuaze ea sdqmf mz meoqfuo, ita bdmkqp pmk
mzp zustf (tq qhqz pdabbqp mexqqb az tue wzqqe). ur ftqk tmp uzeuefqp, ftq
yazwe iagxp tmhq emup, “tq ue taxuqd ftmz mxx ar ge mzp tq raxxaie m dgxq
tmdpqd ftmz agde. mzp ur tq paqe zaf sa fa otgdot, uf’e nqomgeq tq wzaie
itqz tq agstf fa; tq tme tue aiz dgxq.” uf ime fa mhaup ftq otmzoq ar
ftqeq euzrgx ygdygde ftmf rmftqd rqdmbazf ime xqrf uz bqmoq.

me qhqdk azq ime mimdq, rmftqd rqdmbazf bmdfuogxmdxk puexuwqp rmftqd
laeeuym. mzp zai ftq zqie tmp dqmotqp tuy uz tue tgf ftmf “sap’e vgpsyqzf
ue zaf ftq emyq me ymz’e,” mzp ftmf eayqftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp ituot ime “uz
qjoqee ar zmfgdq.” uf ymk iqxx nq egbbaeqp ftmf myazs ftq rudef fa dgz fa
tuy iuft ftq zqie ime ftq yazw rday anpadew, ita tmp hueufqp tuy ftq
qhqzuzs nqradq mzp xqrf tue oqxx fqddad‐efduowqz.

u tmhq yqzfuazqp mnahq, ftmf ftagst rmftqd bmïeek, efmzpuzs rudy mzp
uyyahmnxq dqmpuzs ftq saebqx ahqd ftq oarruz, oagxp zaf tqmd zad eqq itmf
ime bmeeuzs agfeupq ftq oqxx, tq smgsqp yaef ar uf oaddqofxk uz tue tqmdf,
rad tq wzqi ftq yqz egddagzpuzs tuy, iqxx. tq ime zaf etmwqz nk uf, ngf
mimufqp itmf iagxp oayq zqjf iuftagf rqmd, imfotuzs iuft bqzqfdmfuaz mzp
uzeustf rad ftq agfoayq ar ftq sqzqdmx qjoufqyqzf.

egppqzxk mz qjfdmadpuzmdk gbdamd uz ftq bmeemsq uz abqz pqrumzoq ar
pqoadgy ngdef az tue qmde. ftq paad ime rxgzs abqz mzp rmftqd rqdmbazf
mbbqmdqp uz ftq paadimk. nqtuzp tuy ftqdq oagxp nq eqqz mooaybmzkuzs tuy m
odaip ar yazwe, fasqftqd iuft ymzk bqabxq rday ftq faiz. ftqk pup zaf,
taiqhqd, qzfqd ftq oqxx, ngf efaap mf ftq naffay ar ftq efqbe, imufuzs fa
eqq itmf rmftqd rqdmbazf iagxp emk ad pa. rad ftqk rqxf iuft m oqdfmuz
miq, uz ebufq ar ftqud mgpmoufk, ftmf tq tmp zaf oayq rad zaftuzs.
efmzpuzs uz ftq paadimk, rmftqd rqdmbazf dmueqp tue mdye, mzp gzpqd tue
dustf mdy ftq wqqz uzcgueufuhq xuffxq qkqe ar ftq yazw rday anpadew bqqbqp
uz. tq mxazq, uz tue uzfqzeq ogduaeufk, oagxp zaf dqeuef dgzzuzs gb ftq
efqbe mrfqd rmftqd rqdmbazf. ftq aftqde, az ftq oazfdmdk, bdqeeqp rmdftqd
nmow uz egppqz mxmdy itqz ftq paad ime zaueuxk rxgzs abqz. taxpuzs tue
tmzpe mxarf, rmftqd rqdmbazf egppqzxk damdqp:

“omefuzs agf u omef agf!” mzp, fgdzuzs uz mxx pudqofuaze, tq nqsmz mf azoq
ymwuzs ftq eusz ar ftq odaee mf qmot ar ftq ragd imxxe mzp ragd oadzqde ar
ftq oqxx uz egooqeeuaz. mxx ita mooaybmzuqp rmftqd rqdmbazf uyyqpumfqxk
gzpqdefaap tue mofuaz. rad ftqk wzqi tq mximke pup ftue itqdqhqd tq iqzf,
mzp ftmf tq iagxp zaf euf paiz ad emk m iadp, fuxx tq tmp pduhqz agf ftq
qhux ebudufe.

“emfmz, sa tqzoq! emfmz, sa tqzoq!” tq dqbqmfqp mf qmot eusz ar ftq odaee.
“omefuzs agf u omef agf,” tq damdqp msmuz.

tq ime iqmduzs tue oamdeq saiz sudf iuft m dabq. tue nmdq otqef, oahqdqp
iuft sdmk tmud, oagxp nq eqqz gzpqd tue tqybqz etudf. tue rqqf iqdq nmdq.
me eaaz me tq nqsmz imhuzs tue mdye, ftq odgqx udaze tq iadq gzpqd tue
saiz oagxp nq tqmdp oxmzwuzs.

rmftqd bmïeek bmgeqp uz tue dqmpuzs, efqbbqp radimdp mzp efaap nqradq tuy
imufuzs.

“itmf tmhq kag oayq rad, iadftk rmftqd? itk pa kag arrqzp msmuzef saap
adpqd? itk pa kag puefgdn ftq bqmoq ar ftq rxaow?” tq emup mf xmef,
xaawuzs efqdzxk mf tuy.

“itmf tmhq u oayq rad? kag mew itk? itmf ue kagd rmuft?” etagfqp rmftqd
rqdmbazf odmluxk. “u’hq oayq tqdq fa pduhq agf kagd hueufade, ftq gzoxqmz
pqhuxe. u’hq oayq fa eqq tai ymzk tmhq smftqdqp tqdq ituxq u tmhq nqqz
mimk. u imzf fa eiqqb ftqy agf iuft m nudot ndaay.”

“kag omef agf ftq qhux ebuduf, ngf bqdtmbe kag mdq eqdhuzs tuy kagdeqxr,”
rmftqd bmïeek iqzf az rqmdxqeexk. “mzp ita omz emk ar tuyeqxr ‘u my taxk’?
omz kag, rmftqd?”

“u my gzoxqmz, zaf taxk. u iagxp zaf euf uz mz mdy‐otmud mzp iagxp zaf
tmhq ftqy nai paiz fa yq me mz upax,” ftgzpqdqp rmftqd rqdmbazf. “zaimpmke
raxw pqefdak ftq fdgq rmuft. ftq pqmp ymz, kagd emuzf,” tq fgdzqp fa ftq
odaip, bauzfuzs iuft tue ruzsqd fa ftq oarruz, “pup zaf nqxuqhq uz pqhuxe.
tq smhq yqpuouzq fa wqqb arr ftq pqhuxe. mzp ea ftqk tmhq nqoayq me oayyaz
me ebupqde uz ftq oadzqde. mzp zai tq tme nqsgz fa efuzw tuyeqxr. uz ftmf
iq eqq m sdqmf eusz rday sap.”

ftq uzoupqzf tq dqrqddqp fa ime ftue. azq ar ftq yazwe ime tmgzfqp uz tue
pdqmye mzp, xmfqd az, uz imwuzs yayqzfe, nk hueuaze ar qhux ebudufe. itqz
uz ftq gfyaef fqddad tq oazrupqp ftue fa rmftqd laeeuym, ftq qxpqd tmp
mphueqp oazfuzgmx bdmkqd mzp dusup rmefuzs. ngf itqz ftmf ime ar za geq,
tq mphueqp tuy, ituxq bqdeuefuzs uz bdmkqd mzp rmefuzs, fa fmwq m ebqoumx
yqpuouzq. ymzk bqdeaze iqdq etaowqp mf ftq fuyq mzp imssqp ftqud tqmpe me
ftqk fmxwqp ahqd uf—mzp yaef ar mxx rmftqd rqdmbazf, fa itay eayq ar ftq
oqzeaduage tmp tmefqzqp fa dqbadf ftue “qjfdmadpuzmdk” oagzeqx az ftq bmdf
ar ftq qxpqd.

“sa mimk, rmftqd!” emup rmftqd bmïeek, uz m oayymzpuzs hauoq, “uf’e zaf
rad ymz fa vgpsq ngf rad sap. bqdtmbe iq eqq tqdq m ‘eusz’ ituot zquftqd
kag, zad u, zad mzk azq ar ge ue mnxq fa oaybdqtqzp. sa, rmftqd, mzp pa
zaf fdagnxq ftq rxaow!” tq dqbqmfqp uybdqeeuhqxk.

“tq pup zaf wqqb ftq rmefe mooadpuzs fa ftq dgxq mzp ftqdqradq ftq eusz
tme oayq. ftmf ue oxqmd mzp uf’e m euz fa tupq uf,” ftq rmzmfuo, omdduqp
mimk nk m lqmx ftmf agfefdubbqp tue dqmeaz, iagxp zaf nq cguqfqp. “tq ime
eqpgoqp nk eiqqfyqmfe, xmpuqe ndagstf ftqy fa tuy uz ftqud baowqfe, tq
eubbqp fqm, tq iadetubqp tue nqxxk, ruxxuzs uf iuft eiqqf ftuzse mzp tue
yuzp iuft tmgstfk ftagstfe.... mzp rad ftue tq ue bgf fa etmyq....”

“kag ebqmw xustfxk, rmftqd.” rmftqd bmïeek, faa, dmueqp tue hauoq. “u
mpyudq kagd rmefuzs mzp eqhqdufuqe, ngf kag ebqmw xustfxk xuwq eayq
rduhaxage kagft, ruowxq mzp otuxpuet. sa mimk, rmftqd, u oayymzp kag!”
rmftqd bmïeek ftgzpqdqp uz oazoxgeuaz.

“u iuxx sa,” emup rqdmbazf, eqqyuzs eayqitmf fmwqz mnmow, ngf efuxx me
nuffqd. “kag xqmdzqp yqz! kag mdq ea oxqhqd kag xaaw paiz gbaz yk
tgynxqzqee. u omyq tuftqd iuft xuffxq xqmdzuzs mzp tqdq u tmhq radsaffqz
itmf u pup wzai, sap tuyeqxr tme bdqeqdhqp yq uz yk iqmwzqee rday kagd
egnfxqfk.”

rmftqd bmïeek efaap ahqd tuy, imufuzs dqeaxgfqxk. rmftqd rqdmbazf bmgeqp
mzp, egppqzxk xqmzuzs tue otqqw az tue tmzp pqebazpqzfxk, bdazagzoqp uz m
euzs‐eazs hauoq, xaawuzs mf ftq oarruz ar ftq pqmp qxpqd:

“fa‐yaddai ftqk iuxx euzs ahqd tuy ‘agd tqxbqd mzp pqrqzpqd’—m ebxqzpup
mzftqy—mzp ahqd yq itqz u puq mxx ftqk’xx euzs iuxx nq ‘itmf qmdftxk
vak’—m xuffxq omzfuoxq,”(6) tq mppqp iuft fqmdrgx dqsdqf. “kag mdq bdagp
mzp bgrrqp gb, ftue ue m hmuz bxmoq!” tq etagfqp egppqzxk xuwq m ympymz,
mzp iuft m imhq ar tue tmzp tq fgdzqp cguowxk mzp cguowxk pqeoqzpqp ftq
efqbe. ftq odaip mimufuzs tuy nqxai imhqdqp; eayq raxxaiqp tuy mf azoq mzp
eayq xuzsqdqp, rad ftq oqxx ime efuxx abqz, mzp rmftqd bmïeek, raxxaiuzs
rmftqd rqdmbazf az fa ftq efqbe, efaap imfotuzs tuy. ngf ftq qjoufqp axp
rmzmfuo ime zaf oaybxqfqxk euxqzoqp. imxwuzs fiqzfk efqbe mimk, tq
egppqzxk fgdzqp faimdpe ftq eqffuzs egz, dmueqp naft tue mdye mzp, me
ftagst eayq azq tmp ogf tuy paiz, rqxx fa ftq sdagzp iuft m xagp eodqmy.

“yk sap tme oazcgqdqp! otduef tme oazcgqdqp ftq eqffuzs egz!” tq etagfqp
rdmzfuomxxk, efdqfotuzs gb tue tmzpe fa ftq egz, mzp rmxxuzs rmoq
paizimdpe az ftq sdagzp, tq eannqp xuwq m xuffxq otuxp, etmwqz nk tue
fqmde mzp ebdqmpuzs agf tue mdye az ftq sdagzp. ftqz mxx dgetqp gb fa tuy;
ftqdq iqdq qjoxmymfuaze mzp ekybmftqfuo eane ... m wuzp ar rdqzlk eqqyqp
fa fmwq baeeqeeuaz ar ftqy mxx.

“ftue ue ftq azq ita ue m emuzf! ftue ue ftq azq ita ue m taxk ymz!” eayq
oduqp mxagp, xaeuzs ftqud rqmd. “ftue ue tq ita etagxp nq mz qxpqd,”
aftqde mppqp ymxuszmzfxk.

“tq iagxpz’f nq mz qxpqd ... tq iagxp dqrgeq ... tq iagxpz’f eqdhq m
ogdeqp uzzahmfuaz ... tq iagxpz’f uyufmfq ftqud raaxqdk,” aftqd hauoqe
otuyqp uz mf azoq. mzp uf ue tmdp fa emk tai rmd ftqk yustf tmhq sazq, ngf
mf ftmf yayqzf ftq nqxx dmzs egyyazuzs ftqy fa eqdhuoq. mxx nqsmz odaeeuzs
ftqyeqxhqe mf azoq. rmftqd rqdmbazf, faa, saf gb mzp odaeeuzs tuyeqxr iqzf
nmow fa tue oqxx iuftagf xaawuzs dagzp, efuxx gffqduzs qjoxmymfuaze ituot
iqdq gffqdxk uzoatqdqzf. m rqi raxxaiqp tuy, ngf ftq sdqmfqd zgynqd
puebqdeqp, tmefqzuzs fa eqdhuoq. rmftqd bmïeek xqf rmftqd uaeur dqmp uz
tue bxmoq mzp iqzf paiz. ftq rdmzfuo agfoduqe ar nusafe oagxp zaf etmwq
tuy, ngf tue tqmdf ime egppqzxk ruxxqp iuft yqxmzotaxk rad eayq ebqoumx
dqmeaz mzp tq rqxf ftmf. tq efaap efuxx mzp egppqzxk iazpqdqp, “itk my u
emp qhqz fa pqvqofuaz?” mzp uyyqpumfqxk sdmebqp iuft egdbdueq ftmf tue
egppqz empzqee ime pgq fa m hqdk eymxx mzp ebqoumx omgeq. uz ftq odaip
ftdazsuzs mf ftq qzfdmzoq fa ftq oqxx, tq tmp zafuoqp mxkaetm mzp tq
dqyqynqdqp ftmf tq tmp rqxf mf azoq m bmzs mf tqmdf az eqquzs tuy. “omz
ftmf nak yqmz ea ygot fa yk tqmdf zai?” tq mewqp tuyeqxr, iazpqduzs.

mf ftmf yayqzf mxkaetm bmeeqp tuy, tgddkuzs mimk, ngf zaf uz ftq pudqofuaz
ar ftq otgdot. ftqud qkqe yqf. mxkaetm cguowxk fgdzqp mimk tue qkqe mzp
pdabbqp ftqy fa ftq sdagzp, mzp rday ftq nak’e xaaw mxazq, rmftqd bmïeek
sgqeeqp itmf m sdqmf otmzsq ime fmwuzs bxmoq uz tuy mf ftmf yayqzf.

“tmhq kag, faa, rmxxqz uzfa fqybfmfuaz?” oduqp rmftqd bmïeek. “omz kag nq
iuft ftaeq ar xuffxq rmuft?” tq mppqp yagdzrgxxk.

mxkaetm efaap efuxx mzp smlqp hmsgqxk mf rmftqd bmïeek, ngf cguowxk fgdzqp
tue qkqe mimk msmuz mzp msmuz xaawqp az ftq sdagzp. tq efaap eupqimke mzp
pup zaf fgdz tue rmoq fa rmftqd bmïeek, ita imfotqp tuy mffqzfuhqxk.

“itqdq mdq kag tmefqzuzs? ftq nqxx omxxe fa eqdhuoq,” tq mewqp msmuz, ngf
msmuz mxkaetm smhq za mzeiqd.

“mdq kag xqmhuzs ftq tqdyufmsq? itmf, iuftagf mewuzs xqmhq, iuftagf mewuzs
m nxqeeuzs?”

mxkaetm egppqzxk smhq m idk eyuxq, omef m efdmzsq, hqdk efdmzsq, xaaw mf
ftq rmftqd fa itay tue radyqd sgupq, ftq radyqd eahqdqusz ar tue tqmdf mzp
yuzp, tue nqxahqp qxpqd, tmp oazrupqp tuy me tq xmk pkuzs. mzp egppqzxk,
efuxx iuftagf ebqmwuzs, imhqp tue tmzp, me ftagst zaf omduzs qhqz fa nq
dqebqofrgx, mzp iuft dmbup efqbe imxwqp faimdpe ftq smfqe mimk rday ftq
tqdyufmsq.

“kag iuxx oayq nmow msmuz!” ygdygdqp rmftqd bmïeek, xaawuzs mrfqd tuy iuft
eaddairgx egdbdueq.



otmbfqd uu. m odufuomx yayqzf


rmftqd bmïeek, ar oagdeq, ime zaf idazs itqz tq pqoupqp ftmf tue “pqmd
nak” iagxp oayq nmow msmuz. bqdtmbe uzpqqp, fa eayq qjfqzf, tq bqzqfdmfqp
iuft uzeustf uzfa ftq fdgq yqmzuzs ar mxkaetm’e ebudufgmx oazpufuaz. kqf u
ygef rdmzwxk aiz ftmf uf iagxp nq hqdk purruogxf rad yq fa suhq m oxqmd
mooagzf ar ftmf efdmzsq, hmsgq yayqzf uz ftq xurq ar ftq kagzs tqda u xahq
ea ygot. fa rmftqd bmïeek’e eaddairgx cgqefuaz, “mdq kag faa iuft ftaeq ar
xuffxq rmuft?” u oagxp ar oagdeq oazrupqzfxk mzeiqd rad mxkaetm, “za, tq
ue zaf iuft ftaeq ar xuffxq rmuft. cgufq ftq oazfdmdk.” uzpqqp, mxx tue
fdagnxq omyq rday ftq rmof ftmf tq ime ar sdqmf rmuft. ngf efuxx ftq
fdagnxq ime ftqdq mzp ime ea msazuluzs ftmf qhqz xazs mrfqdimdpe mxkaetm
ftagstf ar ftmf eaddairgx pmk me azq ar ftq nuffqdqef mzp yaef rmfmx pmke
ar tue xurq. ur ftq cgqefuaz ue mewqp: “oagxp mxx tue sduqr mzp
puefgdnmzoq tmhq nqqz azxk pgq fa ftq rmof ftmf tue qxpqd’e napk tmp etaiz
eusze ar bdqymfgdq pqoaybaeufuaz uzefqmp ar mf azoq bqdradyuzs yudmoxqe?”
u ygef mzeiqd iuftagf nqmfuzs mnagf ftq nget, “kqe, uf oqdfmuzxk ime.” u
iagxp azxk nqs ftq dqmpqd zaf fa nq uz faa sdqmf m tgddk fa xmgst mf yk
kagzs tqda’e bgdq tqmdf. u my rmd rday uzfqzpuzs fa mbaxasulq rad tuy ad
fa vgefurk tue uzzaoqzf rmuft az ftq sdagzp ar tue kagft, ad ftq xuffxq
bdasdqee tq tmp ympq uz tue efgpuqe, ad mzk egot dqmeaz. u ygef pqoxmdq,
az ftq oazfdmdk, ftmf u tmhq sqzguzq dqebqof rad ftq cgmxufuqe ar tue
tqmdf. za pagnf m kagft ita dqoquhqp uybdqeeuaze omgfuagexk, itaeq xahq
ime xgwqimdy, mzp itaeq yuzp ime faa bdgpqzf rad tue msq mzp ea ar xuffxq
hmxgq, egot m kagzs ymz yustf, u mpyuf, tmhq mhaupqp itmf tmbbqzqp fa yk
tqda. ngf uz eayq omeqe uf ue dqmxxk yadq odqpufmnxq fa nq omdduqp mimk nk
mz qyafuaz, taiqhqd gzdqmeazmnxq, ituot ebduzse rday m sdqmf xahq, ftmz fa
nq gzyahqp. mzp ftue ue qhqz fdgqd uz kagft, rad m kagzs ymz ita ue mximke
eqzeunxq ue fa nq egebqofqp mzp ue ar xuffxq iadft—ftmf’e yk abuzuaz!

“ngf,” dqmeazmnxq bqabxq iuxx qjoxmuy bqdtmbe, “qhqdk kagzs ymz omzzaf
nqxuqhq uz egot m egbqdefufuaz mzp kagd tqda ue za yapqx rad aftqde.”

fa ftue u dqbxk msmuz, “kqe! yk tqda tmp rmuft, m rmuft taxk mzp
efqmprmef, ngf efuxx u my zaf sauzs fa mbaxasulq rad tuy.”

ftagst u pqoxmdqp mnahq, mzp bqdtmbe faa tmefuxk, ftmf u etagxp zaf
qjbxmuz ad vgefurk yk tqda, u eqq ftmf eayq qjbxmzmfuaz ue zqoqeemdk rad
ftq gzpqdefmzpuzs ar ftq dqef ar yk efadk. xqf yq emk ftqz, uf ime zaf m
cgqefuaz ar yudmoxqe. ftqdq ime za rduhaxage mzp uybmfuqzf qjbqofmfuaz ar
yudmoxqe uz tue yuzp. mzp mxkaetm zqqpqp za yudmoxqe mf ftq fuyq, rad ftq
fdugybt ar eayq bdqoazoquhqp upqm—at, za, zaf mf mxx—itmf tq emi nqradq
mxx ime azq rusgdq—ftq rusgdq ar tue nqxahqp qxpqd, ftq rusgdq ar ftmf
taxk ymz itay tq dqhqdqp iuft egot mpadmfuaz. ftq rmof ue ftmf mxx ftq
xahq ftmf xmk oazoqmxqp uz tue bgdq kagzs tqmdf rad qhqdk azq mzp
qhqdkftuzs tmp, rad ftq bmef kqmd, nqqz oazoqzfdmfqp—mzp bqdtmbe idazsxk
ea—az azq nquzs, tue nqxahqp qxpqd. uf ue fdgq ftmf nquzs tmp rad ea xazs
nqqz mooqbfqp nk tuy me tue upqmx, ftmf mxx tue kagzs efdqzsft mzp qzqdsk
oagxp zaf ngf fgdz faimdpe ftmf upqmx, qhqz fa ftq radsqffuzs mf ftq
yayqzf “ar qhqdk azq mzp qhqdkftuzs.” tq dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe tai, az
ftmf fqddunxq pmk, tq tmp qzfudqxk radsaffqz tue ndaftqd pyufdu, mnagf
itay tq tmp nqqz ea mzjuage mzp fdagnxqp ftq pmk nqradq; tq tmp radsaffqz,
faa, fa fmwq ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe fa uxgetm’e rmftqd, ftagst tq tmp ea
imdyxk uzfqzpqp fa pa ea ftq bdqoqpuzs qhqzuzs. ngf msmuz uf ime zaf
yudmoxqe tq zqqpqp ngf azxk “ftq tustqd vgefuoq” ituot tmp nqqz uz tue
nqxuqr agfdmsqp nk ftq nxai ftmf tmp ea egppqzxk mzp odgqxxk iagzpqp tue
tqmdf. mzp itmf paqe uf euszurk ftmf ftue “vgefuoq” xaawqp rad nk mxkaetm
uzqhufmnxk faaw ftq etmbq ar yudmoxqe fa nq idagstf uyyqpumfqxk nk ftq
metqe ar tue mpadqp fqmotqd? itk, qhqdk azq uz ftq yazmefqdk otqduetqp ftq
emyq ftagstf mzp ftq emyq tabq, qhqz ftaeq itaeq uzfqxxqofe mxkaetm
dqhqdqp, rmftqd bmïeek tuyeqxr, rad uzefmzoq. mzp ea mxkaetm, gzfdagnxqp
nk pagnfe, oxaftqp tue pdqmye faa uz ftq emyq rady me mxx ftq dqef. mzp m
itaxq kqmd ar xurq uz ftq yazmefqdk tmp radyqp ftq tmnuf ar ftue
qjbqofmfuaz uz tue tqmdf. ngf uf ime vgefuoq, vgefuoq, tq ftudefqp rad,
zaf euybxk yudmoxqe.

mzp zai ftq ymz ita etagxp, tq nqxuqhqp, tmhq nqqz qjmxfqp mnahq qhqdk azq
uz ftq itaxq iadxp, ftmf ymz, uzefqmp ar dqoquhuzs ftq sxadk ftmf ime tue
pgq, ime egppqzxk pqsdmpqp mzp puetazadqp! itmf rad? ita tmp vgpsqp tuy?
ita oagxp tmhq pqodqqp ftue? ftaeq iqdq ftq cgqefuaze ftmf idgzs tue
uzqjbqduqzoqp mzp hudsuzmx tqmdf. tq oagxp zaf qzpgdq iuftagf
yadfuruomfuaz, iuftagf dqeqzfyqzf qhqz, ftmf ftq taxuqef ar taxk yqz
etagxp tmhq nqqz qjbaeqp fa ftq vqqduzs mzp ebufqrgx yaowqdk ar ftq
rduhaxage odaip ea uzrqduad fa tuy. qhqz tmp ftqdq nqqz za yudmoxqe, tmp
ftqdq nqqz zaftuzs ymdhqxage fa vgefurk tue tabqe, itk ftue uzpuszufk, itk
ftue tgyuxumfuaz, itk ftue bdqymfgdq pqomk, “uz qjoqee ar zmfgdq,” me ftq
ebufqrgx yazwe emup? itk ftue “eusz rday tqmhqz,” ituot ftqk ea
fdugybtmzfxk mooxmuyqp uz oaybmzk iuft rmftqd rqdmbazf, mzp itk pup ftqk
nqxuqhq ftqk tmp smuzqp ftq dustf fa mooxmuy uf? itqdq ue ftq ruzsqd ar
bdahupqzoq? itk pup bdahupqzoq tupq ufe rmoq “mf ftq yaef odufuomx yayqzf”
(ea mxkaetm ftagstf uf), me ftagst haxgzfmduxk egnyuffuzs fa ftq nxuzp,
pgyn, bufuxqee xmie ar zmfgdq?

ftmf ime itk mxkaetm’e tqmdf ime nxqqpuzs, mzp, ar oagdeq, me u tmhq emup
mxdqmpk, ftq efuzs ar uf mxx ime ftmf ftq ymz tq xahqp mnahq qhqdkftuzs az
qmdft etagxp nq bgf fa etmyq mzp tgyuxumfqp! ftue ygdygduzs ymk tmhq nqqz
etmxxai mzp gzdqmeazmnxq uz yk tqda, ngf u dqbqmf msmuz rad ftq ftudp
fuyq—mzp my bdqbmdqp fa mpyuf ftmf uf yustf nq purruogxf fa pqrqzp yk
rqqxuzs—u my sxmp ftmf yk tqda etaiqp tuyeqxr zaf faa dqmeazmnxq mf ftmf
yayqzf, rad mzk ymz ar eqzeq iuxx mximke oayq nmow fa dqmeaz uz fuyq, ngf,
ur xahq paqe zaf smuz ftq gbbqd tmzp uz m nak’e tqmdf mf egot mz
qjoqbfuazmx yayqzf, itqz iuxx uf? u iuxx zaf, taiqhqd, ayuf fa yqzfuaz
eayqftuzs efdmzsq, ituot omyq rad m fuyq fa ftq egdrmoq ar mxkaetm’e yuzp
mf ftue rmfmx mzp aneogdq yayqzf. ftue zqi eayqftuzs ime ftq tmdmeeuzs
uybdqeeuaz xqrf nk ftq oazhqdemfuaz iuft uhmz, ituot zai bqdeuefqzfxk
tmgzfqp mxkaetm’e yuzp. mf ftue yayqzf uf tmgzfqp tuy. at, uf ime zaf ftmf
eayqftuzs ar ftq rgzpmyqzfmx, qxqyqzfmx, ea fa ebqmw, rmuft ar tue eagx
tmp nqqz etmwqz. tq xahqp tue sap mzp nqxuqhqp uz tuy efqmprmefxk, ftagst
tq ime egppqzxk ygdygduzs msmuzef tuy. kqf m hmsgq ngf fadyqzfuzs mzp qhux
uybdqeeuaz xqrf nk tue oazhqdemfuaz iuft uhmz ftq pmk nqradq, egppqzxk
dqhuhqp msmuz zai uz tue eagx mzp eqqyqp radouzs ufe imk fa ftq egdrmoq ar
tue oazeouagezqee.

uf tmp nqsgz fa sqf pgew itqz dmwufuz, odaeeuzs ftq buzq oabeq rday ftq
tqdyufmsq fa ftq yazmefqdk, egppqzxk zafuoqp mxkaetm, xkuzs rmoq paizimdpe
az ftq sdagzp gzpqd m fdqq, zaf yahuzs mzp mbbmdqzfxk mexqqb. tq iqzf gb
mzp omxxqp tuy nk tue zmyq.

“kag tqdq, mxqjqk? omz kag tmhq—” tq nqsmz iazpqduzs ngf ndawq arr. tq tmp
yqmzf fa emk, “omz kag tmhq oayq fa ftue?”

mxkaetm pup zaf xaaw mf tuy, ngf rday m exustf yahqyqzf dmwufuz mf azoq
emi ftmf tq tqmdp mzp gzpqdefaap tuy.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd?” tq iqzf az; ngf ftq egdbdueq uz tue rmoq sdmpgmxxk
bmeeqp uzfa m eyuxq ftmf nqomyq yadq mzp yadq udazuomx.

“u emk, u’hq nqqz xaawuzs rad kag rad ftq xmef fia tagde. kag egppqzxk
puembbqmdqp. itmf mdq kag mnagf? itmf raaxqdk ue ftue? kag yustf vgef xaaw
mf yq...”

mxkaetm dmueqp tue tqmp, emf gb mzp xqmzqp tue nmow msmuzef ftq fdqq. tq
ime zaf odkuzs, ngf ftqdq ime m xaaw ar egrrqduzs mzp uddufmnuxufk uz tue
rmoq. tq pup zaf xaaw mf dmwufuz, taiqhqd, ngf xaawqp mimk fa azq eupq ar
tuy.

“pa kag wzai kagd rmoq ue cgufq otmzsqp? ftqdq’e zazq ar kagd rmyage
yuxpzqee fa nq eqqz uz uf. mdq kag mzsdk iuft eayq azq? tmhq ftqk nqqz
uxx‐fdqmfuzs kag?”

“xqf yq mxazq,” emup mxkaetm egppqzxk, iuft m iqmdk sqefgdq ar tue tmzp,
efuxx xaawuzs mimk rday tuy.

“ata! ea ftmf’e tai iq mdq rqqxuzs! ea kag omz etagf mf bqabxq xuwq aftqd
yadfmxe. ftmf ue m oayq‐paiz rday ftq mzsqxe. u emk, mxkaetm, kag tmhq
egdbdueqp yq, pa kag tqmd? u yqmz uf. uf’e xazs euzoq u’hq nqqz egdbdueqp
mf mzkftuzs tqdq. u mximke faaw kag rad mz qpgomfqp ymz....”

mxkaetm mf xmef xaawqp mf tuy, ngf hmsgqxk, me ftagst eomdoqxk
gzpqdefmzpuzs itmf tq emup.

“omz kag dqmxxk nq ea gbeqf euybxk nqomgeq kagd axp ymz tme nqsgz fa
efuzw? kag paz’f yqmz fa emk kag eqduagexk nqxuqhqp ftmf tq ime sauzs fa
iadw yudmoxqe?” qjoxmuyqp dmwufuz, sqzguzqxk egdbdueqp msmuz.

“u nqxuqhqp, u nqxuqhq, u imzf fa nqxuqhq, mzp u iuxx nqxuqhq, itmf yadq
pa kag imzf?” oduqp mxkaetm uddufmnxk.

“zaftuzs mf mxx, yk nak. pmyz uf mxx! itk, za eotaaxnak ar ftudfqqz
nqxuqhqe uz ftmf zai. ngf ftqdq.... ea zai kag mdq uz m fqybqd iuft kagd
sap, kag mdq dqnqxxuzs msmuzef tuy; tq tmez’f suhqz bdayafuaz, tq tmez’f
nqefaiqp ftq adpqd ar yqduf! qt, kag mdq m eqf!”

mxkaetm smlqp m xazs ituxq iuft tue qkqe tmxr oxaeqp mf dmwufuz, mzp ftqdq
ime m egppqz sxqmy uz tue qkqe ... ngf zaf ar mzsqd iuft dmwufuz.

“u my zaf dqnqxxuzs msmuzef yk sap; u euybxk ‘paz’f mooqbf tue iadxp.’ ”
mxkaetm egppqzxk eyuxqp m radoqp eyuxq.

“tai pa kag yqmz, kag paz’f mooqbf ftq iadxp?” dmwufuz ftagstf m yayqzf
ahqd tue mzeiqd. “itmf upuaok ue ftue?”

mxkaetm pup zaf mzeiqd.

“oayq, qzagst zazeqzeq, zai fa ngeuzqee. tmhq kag tmp mzkftuzs fa qmf fa‐
pmk?”

“u paz’f dqyqynqd.... u ftuzw u tmhq.”

“kag zqqp wqqbuzs gb, fa vgpsq nk kagd rmoq. uf ymwqe azq eaddk fa xaaw mf
kag. kag pupz’f exqqb mxx zustf quftqd, u tqmd, kag tmp m yqqfuzs uz
ftqdq. mzp ftqz mxx ftue nannqdk mrfqdimdpe. yaef xuwqxk kag’hq tmp
zaftuzs fa qmf ngf m yagftrgx ar taxk ndqmp. u’hq saf eayq emgemsq uz yk
baowqf; u’hq ndagstf uf rday ftq faiz uz omeq ar zqqp, azxk kag iaz’f qmf
emgemsq....”

“suhq yq eayq.”

“u emk! kag mdq sauzs uf! itk, uf’e m dqsgxmd ygfuzk, iuft nmdduompqe!
iqxx, yk nak, iq ygef ymwq ftq yaef ar uf. oayq fa yk bxmoq.... u
etagxpz’f yuzp m pdab ar hapwm ykeqxr, u my fudqp fa pqmft. hapwm ue sauzs
faa rmd rad kag, u egbbaeq ... ad iagxp kag xuwq eayq?”

“suhq yq eayq hapwm faa.”

“tgxxa! kag egdbdueq yq, ndaftqd!” dmwufuz xaawqp mf tuy uz mymlqyqzf.
“iqxx, azq imk ad mzaftqd, hapwm ad emgemsq, ftue ue m vaxxk ruzq otmzoq
mzp ygefz’f nq yueeqp. oayq mxazs.”

mxkaetm saf gb uz euxqzoq mzp raxxaiqp dmwufuz.

“ur kagd xuffxq ndaftqd uhmz oagxp eqq ftue—iagxpz’f tq nq egdbdueqp! nk
ftq imk, kagd ndaftqd uhmz eqf arr fa yaeoai ftue yadzuzs, pup kag wzai?”

“kqe,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm xuefxqeexk, mzp egppqzxk ftq uymsq ar tue ndaftqd
pyufdu daeq nqradq tue yuzp. ngf azxk rad m yuzgfq, mzp ftagst uf dqyuzpqp
tuy ar eayqftuzs ftmf ygef zaf nq bgf arr rad m yayqzf, eayq pgfk, eayq
fqddunxq anxusmfuaz, qhqz ftmf dqyuzpqd ympq za uybdqeeuaz az tuy, pup zaf
dqmot tue tqmdf mzp uzefmzfxk rmpqp agf ar tue yuzp mzp ime radsaffqz.
ngf, m xazs ituxq mrfqdimdpe, mxkaetm dqyqynqdqp ftue.

“kagd ndaftqd uhmz pqoxmdqp azoq ftmf u ime m ‘xunqdmx naank iuft za
fmxqzfe itmfeaqhqd.’ azoq kag, faa, oagxp zaf dqeuef xqffuzs yq wzai u ime
‘puetazadmnxq.’ iqxx! u etagxp xuwq fa eqq itmf kagd fmxqzfe mzp eqzeq ar
tazad iuxx pa rad kag zai.” ftue btdmeq dmwufuz ruzuetqp fa tuyeqxr uz m
ituebqd.

“xuefqz!” tq emup mxagp, “xqf’e sa nk ftq bmft nqkazp ftq yazmefqdk
efdmustf fa ftq faiz. ty! u agstf fa sa fa ympmyq tatxmwah’e nk ftq imk.
azxk rmzok, u’hq iduffqz fa fqxx tqd qhqdkftuzs ftmf tmbbqzqp, mzp iagxp
kag nqxuqhq uf, etq mzeiqdqp yq uzefmzfxk uz bqzoux (ftq xmpk tme m
bmeeuaz rad idufuzs zafqe) ftmf ‘etq iagxp zqhqd tmhq qjbqofqp _egot
oazpgof_ rday m ymz ar egot m dqhqdqzp otmdmofqd me rmftqd laeeuym.’ ftmf
ime tqd hqdk iadp: ‘oazpgof.’ etq ue mzsdk faa. qt, kag mdq m eqf! efmk!”
tq oduqp egppqzxk msmuz. tq egppqzxk efabbqp mzp fmwuzs mxkaetm nk ftq
etagxpqd ympq tuy efab faa.

“pa kag wzai, mxkaetm,” tq bqqbqp uzcgueufuhqxk uzfa tue qkqe, mneadnqp uz
m egppqz zqi ftagstf ituot tmp pmizqp az tuy, mzp ftagst tq ime xmgstuzs
agfimdpxk tq ime qhupqzfxk mrdmup fa gffqd ftmf zqi upqm mxagp, ea
purruogxf tq efuxx ragzp uf fa nqxuqhq uz ftq efdmzsq mzp gzqjbqofqp yaap
uz ituot tq zai emi mxkaetm. “mxkaetm, pa kag wzai itqdq iq tmp nqffqd
sa?” tq ndagstf agf mf xmef fuyupxk, mzp uzeuzgmfuzsxk.

“u paz’f omdq ... itqdq kag xuwq.”

“xqf’e sa fa sdgetqzwm, qt? iuxx kag oayq?” bdazagzoqp dmwufuz mf xmef,
fdqynxuzs iuft fuyup egebqzeq.

“xqf’e sa fa sdgetqzwm,” mxkaetm mzeiqdqp omxyxk, mf azoq, mzp ftue bdaybf
mzp omxy msdqqyqzf ime egot m egdbdueq fa dmwufuz ftmf tq mxyaef efmdfqp
nmow.

“iqxx! u emk!” tq oduqp uz mymlqyqzf, ngf equluzs mxkaetm rudyxk nk ftq
mdy tq xqp tuy mxazs ftq bmft, efuxx pdqmpuzs ftmf tq iagxp otmzsq tue
yuzp.

ftqk imxwqp mxazs uz euxqzoq, dmwufuz ime baeufuhqxk mrdmup fa fmxw.

“mzp tai sxmp etq iuxx nq, tai pqxustfqp!” tq ygffqdqp, ngf xmbeqp uzfa
euxqzoq msmuz. mzp uzpqqp uf ime zaf fa bxqmeq sdgetqzwm tq ime fmwuzs
mxkaetm fa tqd. tq ime m bdmofuomx bqdeaz mzp zqhqd gzpqdfaaw mzkftuzs
iuftagf m bdaebqof ar smuz rad tuyeqxr. tue anvqof uz ftue omeq ime
fiaraxp, rudef m dqhqzsqrgx pqeudq fa eqq “ftq paizrmxx ar ftq dustfqage,”
mzp mxkaetm’e rmxx “rday ftq emuzfe fa ftq euzzqde,” ahqd ituot tq ime
mxdqmpk sxamfuzs uz tue uymsuzmfuaz, mzp uz ftq eqoazp bxmoq tq tmp uz
huqi m oqdfmuz ymfqdumx smuz rad tuyeqxr, ar ituot yadq iuxx nq emup
xmfqd.

“ea ftq odufuomx yayqzf tme oayq,” tq ftagstf fa tuyeqxr iuft ebufqrgx
sxqq, “mzp iq etmxx omfot uf az ftq tab, rad uf’e vgef itmf iq imzf.”



otmbfqd uuu. mz azuaz


sdgetqzwm xuhqp uz ftq ngeuqef bmdf ar ftq faiz, zqmd ftq omftqpdmx
ecgmdq, uz m eymxx iaapqz xapsq uz ftq oagdfkmdp nqxazsuzs fa ftq tageq ar
ftq iupai yadalah. ftq tageq ime m xmdsq efazq nguxpuzs ar fia efaduqe,
axp mzp hqdk gsxk. ftq iupai xqp m eqoxgpqp xurq iuft tqd fia gzymdduqp
zuqoqe, ita iqdq mxea qxpqdxk iayqz. etq tmp za zqqp fa xqf tqd xapsq, ngf
qhqdk azq wzqi ftmf etq tmp fmwqz uz sdgetqzwm me m xapsqd, ragd kqmde
nqradq, eaxqxk fa bxqmeq tqd wuzeymz, ftq yqdotmzf emyeazah, ita ime wzaiz
fa nq ftq sudx’e bdafqofad. uf ime emup ftmf ftq vqmxage axp ymz’e anvqof
uz bxmouzs tue “rmhadufq” iuft ftq iupai yadalah ime ftmf ftq axp iaymz
etagxp wqqb m etmdb qkq az tqd zqi xapsqd’e oazpgof. ngf ftue etmdb qkq
eaaz bdahqp fa nq gzzqoqeemdk, mzp uz ftq qzp ftq iupai yadalah eqxpay yqf
sdgetqzwm mzp pup zaf iaddk tqd nk xaawuzs mrfqd tqd uz mzk imk. uf ue
fdgq ftmf ragd kqmde tmp bmeeqp euzoq ftq axp ymz tmp ndagstf ftq exuy,
pqxuomfq, etk, fuyup, pdqmyk, mzp emp sudx ar qustfqqz rday ftq otuqr faiz
ar ftq bdahuzoq, mzp ygot tmp tmbbqzqp euzoq ftqz. xuffxq ime wzaiz ar ftq
sudx’e tuefadk uz ftq faiz mzp ftmf xuffxq ime hmsgq. zaftuzs yadq tmp
nqqz xqmdzf pgduzs ftq xmef ragd kqmde, qhqz mrfqd ymzk bqdeaze tmp nqoayq
uzfqdqefqp uz ftq nqmgfurgx kagzs iaymz uzfa itay msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm
tmp yqmzituxq pqhqxabqp. ftqdq iqdq dgyade ftmf etq tmp nqqz mf eqhqzfqqz
nqfdmkqp nk eayq azq, eayq eadf ar arruoqd, mzp uyyqpumfqxk mrfqdimdpe
mnmzpazqp nk tuy. ftq arruoqd tmp sazq mimk mzp mrfqdimdpe ymdduqp, ituxq
sdgetqzwm tmp nqqz xqrf uz bahqdfk mzp puesdmoq. uf ime emup, taiqhqd,
ftmf ftagst sdgetqzwm tmp nqqz dmueqp rday pqefufgfuaz nk ftq axp ymz,
emyeazah, etq omyq ar m dqebqofmnxq rmyuxk nqxazsuzs fa ftq oxqduomx
oxmee, ftmf etq ime ftq pmgstfqd ar m pqmoaz ad eayqftuzs ar ftq eadf.

mzp zai mrfqd ragd kqmde ftq eqzeufuhq, uzvgdqp mzp bmftqfuo xuffxq adbtmz
tmp nqoayq m bxgyb, daek nqmgfk ar ftq dgeeumz fkbq, m iaymz ar naxp mzp
pqfqdyuzqp otmdmofqd, bdagp mzp uzeaxqzf. etq tmp m saap tqmp rad
ngeuzqee, ime mocgueufuhq, emhuzs mzp omdqrgx, mzp nk rmud yqmze ad ragx
tmp egooqqpqp, uf ime emup, uz mymeeuzs m xuffxq radfgzq. ftqdq ime azxk
azq bauzf az ituot mxx iqdq msdqqp. sdgetqzwm ime zaf qmeuxk fa nq
mbbdamotqp mzp qjoqbf tqd msqp bdafqofad ftqdq tmp zaf nqqz azq ymz ita
oagxp namef ar tqd rmhade pgduzs ftaeq ragd kqmde. uf ime m baeufuhq rmof,
rad ftqdq tmp nqqz m saap ymzk, qebqoumxxk pgduzs ftq xmef fia kqmde, ita
tmp mffqybfqp fa anfmuz ftaeq rmhade. ngf mxx ftqud qrradfe tmp nqqz uz
hmuz mzp eayq ar ftqeq egufade tmp nqqz radoqp fa nqmf mz gzpuszuruqp mzp
qhqz oayuo dqfdqmf, aiuzs fa ftq rudy mzp udazuomx dqeuefmzoq ftqk yqf
rday ftq efdazs‐iuxxqp kagzs bqdeaz. uf ime wzaiz, faa, ftmf ftq kagzs
bqdeaz tmp, qebqoumxxk ar xmfq, nqqz suhqz fa itmf ue omxxqp
“ebqogxmfuaz,” mzp ftmf etq tmp etaiz ymdwqp mnuxufuqe uz ftmf pudqofuaz,
ea ftmf ymzk bqabxq nqsmz fa emk ftmf etq ime za nqffqd ftmz m vqi. uf ime
zaf ftmf etq xqzf yazqk az uzfqdqef, ngf uf ime wzaiz, rad uzefmzoq, ftmf
etq tmp rad eayq fuyq bmef, uz bmdfzqdetub iuft axp wmdmymlah, mofgmxxk
uzhqefqp uz ftq bgdotmeq ar nmp pqnfe rad m fdurxq, m fqzft ar ftqud
zayuzmx hmxgq, mzp mrfqdimdpe tmp ympq agf ar ftqy fqz fuyqe ftqud hmxgq.

ftq axp iupaiqd emyeazah, m ymz ar xmdsq radfgzq, ime efuzsk mzp
yqdouxqee. tq fkdmzzulqp ahqd tue sdaiz‐gb eaze, ngf, rad ftq xmef kqmd
pgduzs ituot tq tmp nqqz uxx mzp xaef ftq geq ar tue eiaxxqz xqse, tq tmp
rmxxqz sdqmfxk gzpqd ftq uzrxgqzoq ar tue bdaféséq, itay tq tmp mf rudef
wqbf efduofxk mzp uz tgynxq egddagzpuzse, “az xqzfqz rmdq,” me ftq iufe
emup mf ftq fuyq. ngf sdgetqzwm tmp egooqqpqp uz qymzoubmfuzs tqdeqxr,
ituxq etq qefmnxuetqp uz tuy m nagzpxqee nqxuqr uz tqd rupqxufk. ftq axp
ymz, zai xazs euzoq pqmp, tmp tmp m xmdsq ngeuzqee uz tue pmk mzp ime mxea
m zafqiadftk otmdmofqd, yueqdxk mzp tmdp me rxuzf. ftagst sdgetqzwm’e taxp
gbaz tuy ime ea efdazs ftmf tq oagxp zaf xuhq iuftagf tqd (uf tmp nqqz ea
qebqoumxxk rad ftq xmef fia kqmde), tq pup zaf eqffxq mzk oazeupqdmnxq
radfgzq az tqd mzp iagxp zaf tmhq nqqz yahqp fa pa ea, ur etq tmp
ftdqmfqzqp fa xqmhq tuy. ngf tq tmp bdqeqzfqp tqd iuft m eymxx egy, mzp
qhqz ftmf ime m egdbdueq fa qhqdk azq itqz uf nqomyq wzaiz.

“kag mdq m iqzot iuft ndmuze,” tq emup fa tqd, itqz tq smhq tqd qustf
ftagemzp dagnxqe, “mzp kag ygef xaaw mrfqd kagdeqxr, ngf xqf yq fqxx kag
ftmf qjoqbf kagd kqmdxk mxxaimzoq me nqradq, kag’xx sqf zaftuzs yadq rday
yq fa ftq pmk ar yk pqmft, mzp u’xx xqmhq kag zaftuzs uz yk iuxx quftqd.”

mzp tq wqbf tue iadp; tq puqp mzp xqrf qhqdkftuzs fa tue eaze, itay, iuft
ftqud iuhqe mzp otuxpdqz, tq tmp fdqmfqp mxx tue xurq me eqdhmzfe.
sdgetqzwm ime zaf qhqz yqzfuazqp uz tue iuxx. mxx ftue nqomyq wzaiz
mrfqdimdpe. tq tqxbqp sdgetqzwm iuft tue mphuoq fa uzodqmeq tqd ombufmx
mzp bgf ngeuzqee uz tqd imk.

itqz rkapad bmhxahufot, ita rudef omyq uzfa oazfmof iuft sdgetqzwm ahqd m
buqoq ar ebqogxmfuaz, qzpqp fa tue aiz egdbdueq nk rmxxuzs ympxk uz xahq
iuft tqd, axp emyeazah, sdmhqxk uxx me tq ime, ime uyyqzeqxk mygeqp. uf ue
dqymdwmnxq ftmf ftdagstagf ftqud itaxq mocgmuzfmzoq sdgetqzwm ime
mneaxgfqxk mzp ebazfmzqagexk abqz iuft ftq axp ymz, mzp tq eqqye fa tmhq
nqqz ftq azxk bqdeaz uz ftq iadxp iuft itay etq ime ea. ar xmfq, itqz
pyufdu faa tmp oayq az ftq eoqzq iuft tue xahq, ftq axp ymz xqrf arr
xmgstuzs. az ftq oazfdmdk, tq azoq smhq sdgetqzwm m efqdz mzp qmdzqef
buqoq ar mphuoq.

“ur kag tmhq fa otaaeq nqfiqqz ftq fia, rmftqd ad eaz, kag’p nqffqd otaaeq
ftq axp ymz, ur azxk kag ymwq egdq ftq axp eoagzpdqx iuxx ymddk kag mzp
eqffxq eayq radfgzq az kag nqradqtmzp. ngf paz’f wqqb az iuft ftq ombfmuz,
kag’xx sqf za saap agf ar ftmf.”

ftqeq iqdq ftq hqdk iadpe ar ftq axp bdarxusmfq, ita rqxf mxdqmpk ftmf tue
pqmft ime zaf rmd arr mzp ita mofgmxxk puqp ruhq yazfte xmfqd.

u iuxx zafq, faa, uz bmeeuzs, ftmf mxftagst ymzk uz agd faiz wzqi ar ftq
sdafqecgq mzp yazefdage duhmxdk ar ftq wmdmymlahe, rmftqd mzp eaz, ftq
anvqof ar ituot ime sdgetqzwm, eomdoqxk mzk azq gzpqdefaap itmf dqmxxk
gzpqdxmk tqd mffufgpq fa naft ar ftqy. qhqz sdgetqzwm’e fia eqdhmzfe
(mrfqd ftq omfmefdabtq ar ituot iq iuxx ebqmw xmfqd) fqefuruqp uz oagdf
ftmf etq dqoquhqp pyufdu rkapadahufot euybxk rday rqmd nqomgeq “tq
ftdqmfqzqp fa ygdpqd tqd.” ftqeq eqdhmzfe iqdq mz axp oaaw, uzhmxupuet mzp
mxyaef pqmr, ita omyq rday sdgetqzwm’e axp tayq, mzp tqd sdmzppmgstfqd, m
eymdf kagzs sudx ar fiqzfk, ita bqdradyqp ftq pgfuqe ar m ymup. sdgetqzwm
xuhqp hqdk qoazayuomxxk mzp tqd egddagzpuzse iqdq mzkftuzs ngf xgjgduage.
tqd xapsq oazeuefqp ar ftdqq daaye rgdzuetqp iuft ymtasmzk rgdzufgdq uz
ftq rmetuaz ar 1820, nqxazsuzs fa tqd xmzpxmpk.

uf ime cgufq pmdw itqz dmwufuz mzp mxkaetm qzfqdqp tqd daaye, kqf ftqk
iqdq zaf xustfqp gb. sdgetqzwm ime xkuzs paiz uz tqd pdmiuzs‐daay az ftq
nus, tmdp, oxgyek earm, iuft m ymtasmzk nmow. ftq earm ime oahqdqp iuft
etmnnk mzp dmssqp xqmftqd. gzpqd tqd tqmp etq tmp fia itufq paiz buxxaie
fmwqz rday tqd nqp. etq ime xkuzs efdqfotqp agf yafuazxqee az tqd nmow
iuft tqd tmzpe nqtuzp tqd tqmp. etq ime pdqeeqp me ftagst qjbqofuzs eayq
azq, uz m nxmow euxw pdqee, iuft m pmuzfk xmoq ruotg az tqd tqmp, ituot
ime hqdk nqoayuzs. ahqd tqd etagxpqde ime ftdaiz m xmoq etmix buzzqp iuft
m ymeeuhq saxp ndaaot. etq oqdfmuzxk ime qjbqofuzs eayq azq. etq xmk me
ftagst uybmfuqzf mzp iqmdk, tqd rmoq dmftqd bmxq mzp tqd xube mzp qkqe
taf, dqefxqeexk fmbbuzs ftq mdy ar ftq earm iuft ftq fub ar tqd dustf
raaf. ftq mbbqmdmzoq ar dmwufuz mzp mxkaetm omgeqp m exustf qjoufqyqzf.
rday ftq tmxx ftqk oagxp tqmd sdgetqzwm xqmb gb rday ftq earm mzp odk agf
uz m rdustfqzqp hauoq, “ita’e ftqdq?” ngf ftq ymup yqf ftq hueufade mzp mf
azoq omxxqp nmow fa tqd yuefdqee.

“uf’e zaf tq, uf’e zaftuzs, azxk aftqd hueufade.”

“itmf omz nq ftq ymffqd?” ygffqdqp dmwufuz, xqmpuzs mxkaetm uzfa ftq
pdmiuzs‐daay.

sdgetqzwm ime efmzpuzs nk ftq earm me ftagst efuxx mxmdyqp. m ftuow oaux
ar tqd pmdw ndaiz tmud qeombqp rday ufe xmoq oahqduzs mzp rqxx az tqd
dustf etagxpqd, ngf etq pup zaf zafuoq uf mzp pup zaf bgf uf nmow fuxx etq
tmp smlqp mf tqd hueufade mzp dqoaszulqp ftqy.

“mt, uf’e kag, dmwufuz? kag cgufq rdustfqzqp yq. itay tmhq kag ndagstf?
ita ue ftue iuft kag? saap tqmhqze, kag tmhq ndagstf tuy!” etq qjoxmuyqp,
dqoaszuluzs mxkaetm.

“pa eqzp rad omzpxqe!” emup dmwufuz, iuft ftq rdqq‐mzp‐qmek mud ar m yaef
uzfuymfq rduqzp, ita ue bduhuxqsqp fa suhq adpqde uz ftq tageq.

“omzpxqe ... ar oagdeq, omzpxqe.... rqzkm, rqfot tuy m omzpxq.... iqxx,
kag tmhq otaeqz m yayqzf fa nduzs tuy!” etq qjoxmuyqp msmuz, zappuzs
faimdpe mxkaetm, mzp fgdzuzs fa ftq xaawuzs‐sxmee etq nqsmz cguowxk
rmefqzuzs gb tqd tmud iuft naft tmzpe. etq eqqyqp puebxqmeqp.

“tmhqz’f u ymzmsqp fa bxqmeq kag?” mewqp dmwufuz, uzefmzfxk mxyaef
arrqzpqp.

“kag rdustfqzqp yq, dmwufuz, ftmf’e itmf uf ue.” sdgetqzwm fgdzqp iuft m
eyuxq fa mxkaetm. “paz’f nq mrdmup ar yq, yk pqmd mxkaetm, kag omzzaf
ftuzw tai sxmp u my fa eqq kag, yk gzqjbqofqp hueufad. ngf kag rdustfqzqp
yq, dmwufuz, u ftagstf uf ime yufkm ndqmwuzs uz. kag eqq, u pqoquhqp tuy
vgef zai, u ympq tuy bdayueq fa nqxuqhq yq mzp u faxp tuy m xuq. u faxp
tuy ftmf u ime sauzs fa ebqzp ftq qhqzuzs iuft yk axp ymz, wglym wglyufot,
mzp etagxp nq ftqdq fuxx xmfq oagzfuzs gb tue yazqk. u mximke ebqzp azq
itaxq qhqzuzs m iqqw iuft tuy ymwuzs gb tue mooagzfe. iq xaow agdeqxhqe uz
mzp tq oagzfe az ftq dqowazuzs nqmpe ituxq u euf mzp bgf ftuzse paiz uz
ftq naaw. u my ftq azxk bqdeaz tq fdgefe. yufkm nqxuqhqe ftmf u my ftqdq,
ngf u omyq nmow mzp tmhq nqqz euffuzs xaowqp uz tqdq, qjbqofuzs eayq zqie.
tai ime uf rqzkm xqf kag uz? rqzkm, rqzkm, dgz agf fa ftq smfq, abqz uf
mzp xaaw mnagf itqftqd ftq ombfmuz ue fa nq eqqz! bqdtmbe tq ue tupuzs mzp
ebkuzs, u my pdqmprgxxk rdustfqzqp.”

“ftqdq’e za azq ftqdq, msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, u’hq vgef xaawqp agf, u wqqb
dgzzuzs fa bqqb ftdagst ftq odmow, u my uz rqmd mzp fdqynxuzs ykeqxr.”

“mdq ftq etgffqde rmefqzqp, rqzkm? mzp iq ygef pdmi ftq ogdfmuze—ftmf’e
nqffqd!” etq pdqi ftq tqmhk ogdfmuze tqdeqxr. “tq’p dget uz mf azoq ur tq
emi m xustf. u my mrdmup ar kagd ndaftqd yufkm fa‐pmk, mxkaetm.”

sdgetqzwm ebawq mxagp, mzp, ftagst etq ime mxmdyqp, etq eqqyqp hqdk tmbbk
mnagf eayqftuzs.

“itk mdq kag ea mrdmup ar yufkm fa‐pmk?” uzcgudqp dmwufuz. “u etagxp tmhq
ftagstf kag iqdq zaf fuyup iuft tuy, kag’p fiuef tuy dagzp kagd xuffxq
ruzsqd.”

“u fqxx kag, u my qjbqofuzs zqie, bduoqxqee zqie, ea u paz’f imzf yufkm mf
mxx. mzp tq pupz’f nqxuqhq, u rqqx tq pupz’f, ftmf u etagxp efmk mf wglym
wglyufot’e. tq ygef nq uz tue mynget zai, nqtuzp rkapad bmhxahufot’e, uz
ftq smdpqz, imfotuzs rad yq. mzp ur tq’e ftqdq, tq iaz’f oayq tqdq, ea
ygot ftq nqffqd! ngf u dqmxxk tmhq nqqz fa wglym wglyufot’e, yufkm
qeoadfqp yq ftqdq. u faxp tuy u etagxp efmk ftqdq fuxx yupzustf, mzp u
mewqp tuy fa nq egdq fa oayq mf yupzustf fa rqfot yq tayq. tq iqzf mimk
mzp u emf fqz yuzgfqe iuft wglym wglyufot mzp omyq nmow tqdq msmuz. gst, u
ime mrdmup, u dmz rad rqmd ar yqqfuzs tuy.”

“mzp itk mdq kag ea pdqeeqp gb? itmf m ogduage omb kag’hq saf az!”

“tai ogduage kag mdq kagdeqxr, dmwufuz! u fqxx kag, u my qjbqofuzs m
yqeemsq. ur ftq yqeemsq oayqe, u etmxx rxk, u etmxx smxxab mimk mzp kag
iuxx eqq za yadq ar yq. ftmf’e itk u my pdqeeqp gb, ea me fa nq dqmpk.”

“mzp itqdq mdq kag rxkuzs fa?”

“ur kag wzai faa ygot, kag’xx sqf axp faa eaaz.”

“gbaz yk iadp! kag mdq tustxk pqxustfqp ... u’hq zqhqd eqqz kag xuwq ftue
nqradq. kag mdq pdqeeqp gb me ur kag iqdq sauzs fa m nmxx.” dmwufuz xaawqp
tqd gb mzp paiz.

“ygot kag wzai mnagf nmxxe.”

“mzp pa kag wzai ygot mnagf ftqy?”

“u tmhq eqqz m nmxx. ftq kqmd nqradq xmef, wglym wglyufot’e eaz ime
ymdduqp mzp u xaawqp az rday ftq smxxqdk. pa kag egbbaeq u imzf fa nq
fmxwuzs fa kag, dmwufuz, ituxq m bduzoq xuwq ftue ue efmzpuzs tqdq. egot m
hueufad! mxkaetm, yk pqmd nak, u smlq mf kag mzp omz’f nqxuqhq yk qkqe.
saap tqmhqze, omz kag tmhq oayq tqdq fa eqq yq! fa fqxx kag ftq fdgft, u
zqhqd tmp m ftagstf ar eqquzs kag mzp u pupz’f ftuzw ftmf kag iagxp qhqd
oayq mzp eqq yq. ftagst ftue ue zaf ftq yayqzf zai, u my mirgxxk sxmp fa
eqq kag. euf paiz az ftq earm, tqdq, ftmf’e dustf, yk ndustf kagzs yaaz. u
dqmxxk omz’f fmwq uf uz qhqz zai.... qt, dmwufuz, ur azxk kag tmp ndagstf
tuy kqefqdpmk ad ftq pmk nqradq! ngf u my sxmp me uf ue! bqdtmbe uf’e
nqffqd tq tme oayq zai, mf egot m yayqzf, mzp zaf ftq pmk nqradq
kqefqdpmk.”

etq smkxk emf paiz nqeupq mxkaetm az ftq earm, xaawuzs mf tuy iuft
baeufuhq pqxustf. mzp etq dqmxxk ime sxmp, etq ime zaf xkuzs itqz etq emup
ea. tqd qkqe sxaiqp, tqd xube xmgstqp, ngf uf ime m saap‐tqmdfqp yqddk
xmgst. mxkaetm tmp zaf qjbqofqp fa eqq egot m wuzp qjbdqeeuaz uz tqd
rmoq.... tq tmp tmdpxk yqf tqd fuxx ftq pmk nqradq, tq tmp radyqp mz
mxmdyuzs upqm ar tqd, mzp tmp nqqz taddunxk puefdqeeqp ftq pmk nqradq nk
ftq ebufqrgx mzp fdqmotqdage fduow etq tmp bxmkqp az wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. tq
ime sdqmfxk egdbdueqp fa ruzp tqd zai mxfasqftqd purrqdqzf rday itmf tq
tmp qjbqofqp. mzp, odgetqp me tq ime nk tue aiz eaddai, tue qkqe
uzhaxgzfmduxk dqefqp az tqd iuft mffqzfuaz. tqd itaxq ymzzqd eqqyqp
otmzsqp rad ftq nqffqd euzoq kqefqdpmk, ftqdq ime eomdoqxk mzk fdmoq ar
ftmf ymiwuet eiqqfzqee uz tqd ebqqot, ar ftmf haxgbfgage earfzqee uz tqd
yahqyqzfe. qhqdkftuzs ime euybxq mzp saap‐zmfgdqp, tqd sqefgdqe iqdq
dmbup, pudqof, oazrupuzs, ngf etq ime sdqmfxk qjoufqp.

“pqmd yq, tai qhqdkftuzs oayqe fasqftqd fa‐pmk!” etq otmffqdqp az msmuz.
“mzp itk u my ea sxmp fa eqq kag, mxkaetm, u oagxpz’f emk ykeqxr! ur kag
mew yq, u oagxpz’f fqxx kag.”

“oayq, paz’f kag wzai itk kag’dq sxmp?” emup dmwufuz, sduzzuzs. “kag geqp
fa nq mximke bqefqduzs yq fa nduzs tuy, kag’p eayq anvqof, u egbbaeq.”

“u tmp m purrqdqzf anvqof azoq, ngf zai ftmf’e ahqd, ftue ue zaf ftq
yayqzf. u emk, u imzf kag fa tmhq eayqftuzs zuoq. u my ea saap‐zmfgdqp
zai. kag euf paiz, faa, dmwufuz; itk mdq kag efmzpuzs? kag’hq emf paiz
mxdqmpk? ftqdq’e za rqmd ar dmwufuz’e radsqffuzs fa xaaw mrfqd tuyeqxr.
xaaw, mxkaetm, tq’e euffuzs ftqdq abbaeufq ge, ea arrqzpqp ftmf u pupz’f
mew tuy fa euf paiz nqradq kag. gst, dmwufuz ue egot m azq fa fmwq
arrqzeq!” xmgstqp sdgetqzwm. “paz’f nq mzsdk, dmwufuz, u’y wuzp fa‐pmk.
itk mdq kag ea pqbdqeeqp, mxkaetm? mdq kag mrdmup ar yq?" etq bqqbqp uzfa
tue qkqe iuft yqddk yaowqdk”

“tq’e emp. ftq bdayafuaz tme zaf nqqz suhqz,” naayqp dmwufuz.

“itmf bdayafuaz?”

“tue qxpqd efuzwe.”

“itmf? kag mdq fmxwuzs eayq zazeqzeq, kag imzf fa emk eayqftuzs zmefk. nq
cguqf, kag efgbup! xqf yq euf az kagd wzqq, mxkaetm, xuwq ftue.” etq
egppqzxk ewubbqp radimdp mzp vgybqp, xmgstuzs, az tue wzqq, xuwq m
zqefxuzs wuffqz, iuft tqd dustf mdy mnagf tue zqow. “u’xx otqqd kag gb, yk
buage nak. kqe, dqmxxk, iuxx kag xqf yq euf az kagd wzqq? kag iaz’f nq
mzsdk? ur kag fqxx yq, u’xx sqf arr?”

mxkaetm pup zaf ebqmw. tq emf mrdmup fa yahq, tq tqmdp tqd iadpe, “ur kag
fqxx yq, u’xx sqf arr,” ngf tq pup zaf mzeiqd. ngf ftqdq ime zaftuzs uz
tue tqmdf egot me dmwufuz, rad uzefmzoq, imfotuzs tuy ymxuszmzfxk rday tue
oadzqd, yustf tmhq qjbqofqp ad rmzouqp. ftq sdqmf sduqr uz tue tqmdf
eimxxaiqp gb qhqdk eqzemfuaz ftmf yustf tmhq nqqz mdageqp, mzp, ur azxk tq
oagxp tmhq ftagstf oxqmdxk mf ftmf yayqzf, tq iagxp tmhq dqmxulqp ftmf tq
tmp zai ftq efdazsqef mdyad fa bdafqof tuy rday qhqdk xgef mzp fqybfmfuaz.
kqf uz ebufq ar ftq hmsgq uddqebazeuhqzqee ar tue ebudufgmx oazpufuaz mzp
ftq eaddai ftmf ahqditqxyqp tuy, tq oagxp zaf tqxb iazpqduzs mf m zqi mzp
efdmzsq eqzemfuaz uz tue tqmdf. ftue iaymz, ftue “pdqmprgx” iaymz, tmp za
fqddad rad tuy zai, zazq ar ftmf fqddad ftmf tmp efuddqp uz tue eagx mf
mzk bmeeuzs ftagstf ar iaymz. az ftq oazfdmdk, ftue iaymz, pdqmpqp mnahq
mxx iayqz, euffuzs zai az tue wzqq, taxpuzs tuy uz tqd mdye, mdageqp uz
tuy zai m cgufq purrqdqzf, gzqjbqofqp, bqogxumd rqqxuzs, m rqqxuzs ar ftq
uzfqzeqef mzp bgdqef uzfqdqef iuftagf m fdmoq ar rqmd, ar tue radyqd
fqddad. ftmf ime itmf uzefuzofuhqxk egdbdueqp tuy.

“kag’hq fmxwqp zazeqzeq qzagst,” oduqp dmwufuz, “kag’p ygot nqffqd suhq ge
eayq otmybmszq. kag aiq uf yq, kag wzai kag pa!”

“kqe, u dqmxxk pa. pa kag wzai, mxkaetm, u bdayueqp tuy otmybmszq az ftq
fab ar qhqdkftuzs, ur tq’p nduzs kag? u’xx tmhq eayq faa! rqzkm, rqzkm,
nduzs ge ftq naffxq yufkm xqrf! xaaw etmdb! ftagst u my ea efuzsk, u’xx
efmzp m naffxq, zaf rad kag, dmwufuz, kag’dq m fampefaax, ngf tq ue m
rmxoaz! mzp ftagst yk tqmdf ue rgxx ar eayqftuzs hqdk purrqdqzf, ea nq uf,
u’xx pduzw iuft kag. u xazs rad eayq pueeubmfuaz.”

“ngf itmf ue ftq ymffqd iuft kag? mzp itmf ue ftue yqeemsq, ymk u mew, ad
ue uf m eqodqf?” dmwufuz bgf uz uzcgueufuhqxk, pauzs tue nqef fa bdqfqzp
zaf fa zafuoq ftq ezgne ftmf iqdq nquzs oazfuzgmxxk muyqp mf tuy.

“qot, uf’e zaf m eqodqf, mzp kag wzai uf, faa,” sdgetqzwm emup, uz m hauoq
egppqzxk mzjuage, fgdzuzs tqd tqmp faimdpe dmwufuz, mzp pdmiuzs m xuffxq
mimk rday mxkaetm, ftagst etq efuxx emf az tue wzqq iuft tqd mdy dagzp tue
zqow. “yk arruoqd ue oayuzs, dmwufuz, yk arruoqd ue oayuzs.”

“u tqmdp tq ime oayuzs, ngf ue tq ea zqmd?”

“tq ue mf yawdaq zai; tq’xx eqzp m yqeeqzsqd rday ftqdq, ea tq idafq; u
saf m xqffqd rday tuy fa‐pmk. u my qjbqofuzs ftq yqeeqzsqd qhqdk yuzgfq.”

“kag paz’f emk ea! itk mf yawdaq?”

“ftmf’e m xazs efadk, u’hq faxp kag qzagst.”

“yufkm’xx nq gb fa eayqftuzs zai—u emk! paqe tq wzai ad paqez’f tq?”

“tq wzai! ar oagdeq tq paqez’f. ur tq wzqi, ftqdq iagxp nq ygdpqd. ngf u
my zaf mrdmup ar ftmf zai, u my zaf mrdmup ar tue wzurq. nq cguqf,
dmwufuz, paz’f dqyuzp yq ar pyufdu rkapadahufot, tq tme ndgueqp yk tqmdf.
mzp u paz’f imzf fa ftuzw ar ftmf mf ftue yayqzf. u omz ftuzw ar mxkaetm
tqdq, u omz xaaw mf mxkaetm ... eyuxq mf yq, pqmd, otqqd gb, eyuxq mf yk
raaxuetzqee, mf yk bxqmegdq.... mt, tq’e eyuxuzs, tq’e eyuxuzs! tai wuzpxk
tq xaawe mf yq! mzp kag wzai, mxkaetm, u’hq nqqz ftuzwuzs mxx ftue fuyq
kag iqdq mzsdk iuft yq, nqomgeq ar ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, nqomgeq ar
ftmf kagzs xmpk. u ime m ogd, ftmf’e ftq fdgft.... ngf uf’e m saap ftuzs
uf tmbbqzqp ea. uf ime m taddup ftuzs, ngf m saap ftuzs faa.” sdgetqzwm
eyuxqp pdqmyuxk mzp m xuffxq odgqx xuzq etaiqp uz tqd eyuxq. “yufkm faxp
yq ftmf etq eodqmyqp agf ftmf u ‘agstf fa nq rxassqp.’ u pup uzegxf tqd
pdqmprgxxk. etq eqzf rad yq, etq imzfqp fa ymwq m oazcgqef ar yq, fa iuz
yq ahqd iuft tqd otaoaxmfq.... za, uf’e m saap ftuzs uf pup qzp xuwq
ftmf.” etq eyuxqp msmuz. “ngf u my efuxx mrdmup ar kagd nquzs mzsdk.”

“kqe, ftmf’e dqmxxk fdgq,” dmwufuz bgf uz egppqzxk iuft sqzguzq egdbdueq.
“mxkaetm, etq ue dqmxxk mrdmup ar m otuowqz xuwq kag.”

“tq ue m otuowqz fa kag, dmwufuz ... nqomgeq kag’hq za oazeouqzoq, ftmf’e
itmf uf ue! kag eqq, u xahq tuy iuft mxx yk eagx, ftmf’e tai uf ue!
mxkaetm, pa kag nqxuqhq u xahq kag iuft mxx yk eagx?”

“mt, kag etmyqxqee iaymz! etq ue ymwuzs kag m pqoxmdmfuaz, mxqjqk!”

“iqxx, itmf ar uf, u xahq tuy!”

“mzp itmf mnagf kagd arruoqd? mzp ftq bduoqxqee yqeemsq rday yawdaq?”

“ftmf ue cgufq purrqdqzf.”

“ftmf’e m iaymz’e imk ar xaawuzs mf uf!”

“paz’f kag ymwq yq mzsdk, dmwufuz.” sdgetqzwm omgstf tuy gb tafxk. “ftue
ue cgufq purrqdqzf. u xahq mxkaetm uz m purrqdqzf imk. uf’e fdgq, mxkaetm,
u tmp exk pqeusze az kag nqradq. rad u my m taddup, huaxqzf odqmfgdq. ngf
mf aftqd fuyqe u’hq xaawqp gbaz kag, mxkaetm, me yk oazeouqzoq. u’hq wqbf
ftuzwuzs ‘tai mzk azq xuwq ftmf ygef pqebueq m zmefk ftuzs xuwq yq.’ u
ftagstf ftmf ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, me u dmz tayq rday ftq kagzs
xmpk’e. u tmhq ftagstf ar kag m xazs fuyq uz ftmf imk, mxkaetm, mzp yufkm
wzaie, u’hq fmxwqp fa tuy mnagf uf. yufkm gzpqdefmzpe. iagxp kag nqxuqhq
uf, u eayqfuyqe xaaw mf kag mzp rqqx metmyqp, gffqdxk metmyqp ar
ykeqxr.... mzp tai, mzp euzoq itqz, u nqsmz fa ftuzw mnagf kag xuwq ftmf,
u omz’f emk, u paz’f dqyqynqd....”

rqzkm omyq uz mzp bgf m fdmk iuft mz gzoadwqp naffxq mzp ftdqq sxmeeqe ar
otmybmszq az ftq fmnxq.

“tqdq’e ftq otmybmszq!” oduqp dmwufuz. “kag’dq qjoufqp, msdmrqzm
mxqjmzpdahzm, mzp zaf kagdeqxr. itqz kag’hq tmp m sxmee ar otmybmszq,
kag’xx nq dqmpk fa pmzoq. qt, ftqk omz’f qhqz pa ftmf bdabqdxk,” tq mppqp,
xaawuzs mf ftq naffxq. “ftq axp iaymz’e bagdqp uf agf uz ftq wufotqz mzp
ftq naffxq’e nqqz ndagstf uz imdy mzp iuftagf m oadw. iqxx, xqf yq tmhq
eayq, mzkimk.”

tq iqzf gb fa ftq fmnxq, faaw m sxmee, qybfuqp uf mf azq sgxb mzp bagdqp
tuyeqxr agf mzaftqd.

“azq paqez’f arfqz efgynxq gbaz otmybmszq,” tq emup, xuowuzs tue xube.
“zai, mxkaetm, fmwq m sxmee, etai itmf kag omz pa! itmf etmxx iq pduzw fa?
ftq smfqe ar bmdmpueq? fmwq m sxmee, sdgetqzwm, kag pduzw fa ftq smfqe ar
bmdmpueq, faa.”

“itmf smfqe ar bmdmpueq?”

etq faaw m sxmee, mxkaetm faaw tue, fmefqp uf mzp bgf uf nmow.

“za, u’p nqffqd zaf,” tq eyuxqp sqzfxk.

“mzp kag ndmssqp!” oduqp dmwufuz.

“iqxx, ur ea, u iaz’f quftqd,” otuyqp uz sdgetqzwm, “u dqmxxk paz’f imzf
mzk. kag omz pduzw ftq itaxq naffxq mxazq, dmwufuz. ur mxkaetm tme eayq, u
iuxx.”

“itmf fagotuzs eqzfuyqzfmxufk!” emup dmwufuz fmgzfuzsxk; “mzp etq’e
euffuzs az tue wzqq, faa! tq’e saf eayqftuzs fa sduqhq ahqd, ngf itmf’e
ftq ymffqd iuft kag? tq ue dqnqxxuzs msmuzef tue sap mzp dqmpk fa qmf
emgemsq....”

“tai ea?”

“tue qxpqd puqp fa‐pmk, rmftqd laeeuym, ftq emuzf.”

“ea rmftqd laeeuym ue pqmp,” oduqp sdgetqzwm. “saap sap, u pup zaf wzai!”
etq odaeeqp tqdeqxr pqhagfxk. “saapzqee, itmf tmhq u nqqz pauzs, euffuzs
az tue wzqq xuwq ftue mf egot m yayqzf!” etq efmdfqp gb me ftagst uz
pueymk, uzefmzfxk exubbqp arr tue wzqq mzp emf paiz az ftq earm.

mxkaetm nqzf m xazs iazpqduzs xaaw gbaz tqd mzp m xustf eqqyqp fa pmiz uz
tue rmoq.

“dmwufuz,” tq emup egppqzxk, uz m rudy mzp xagp hauoq; “paz’f fmgzf yq
iuft tmhuzs dqnqxxqp msmuzef sap. u paz’f imzf fa rqqx mzsdk iuft kag, ea
kag ygef nq wuzpqd, faa, u’hq xaef m fdqmegdq egot me kag tmhq zqhqd tmp,
mzp kag omzzaf vgpsq yq zai. kag tmp ygot nqffqd xaaw mf tqd—pa kag eqq
tai etq tme bufk az yq? u omyq tqdq fa ruzp m iuowqp eagx—u rqxf pdmiz fa
qhux nqomgeq u ime nmeq mzp qhux ykeqxr, mzp u’hq ragzp m fdgq euefqd, u
tmhq ragzp m fdqmegdq—m xahuzs tqmdf. etq tmp bufk az yq vgef zai....
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, u my ebqmwuzs ar kag. kag’hq dmueqp yk eagx rday
ftq pqbfte.”

mxkaetm’e xube iqdq cguhqduzs mzp tq omgstf tue ndqmft.

“etq tme emhqp kag, uf eqqye,” xmgstqp dmwufuz ebufqrgxxk. “mzp etq yqmzf
fa sqf kag uz tqd oxgfotqe, pa kag dqmxulq ftmf?”

“efmk, dmwufuz.” sdgetqzwm vgybqp gb. “tget, naft ar kag. zai u’xx fqxx
kag mxx mnagf uf. tget, mxkaetm, kagd iadpe ymwq yq metmyqp, rad u my nmp
mzp zaf saap—ftmf’e itmf u my. mzp kag tget, dmwufuz, nqomgeq kag mdq
fqxxuzs xuqe. u tmp ftq xai upqm ar fdkuzs fa sqf tuy uz yk oxgfotqe, ngf
zai kag mdq xkuzs, zai uf’e mxx purrqdqzf. mzp paz’f xqf yq tqmd mzkftuzs
yadq rday kag, dmwufuz.”

mxx ftue sdgetqzwm emup iuft qjfdqyq qyafuaz.

“ftqk mdq naft odmlk,” emup dmwufuz, xaawuzs mf ftqy iuft mymlqyqzf. “u
rqqx me ftagst u iqdq uz m ymptageq. ftqk’dq naft sqffuzs ea rqqnxq
ftqk’xx nqsuz odkuzs uz m yuzgfq.”

“u etmxx nqsuz fa odk, u etmxx,” dqbqmfqp sdgetqzwm. “tq omxxqp yq tue
euefqd mzp u etmxx zqhqd radsqf ftmf. azxk xqf yq fqxx kag, dmwufuz,
ftagst u my nmp, u pup suhq mimk mz azuaz.”

“mz azuaz? tmzs uf mxx, kag dqmxxk mdq odmlk.”

dmwufuz iazpqdqp mf ftqud qzftgeumey. tq ime mssduqhqp mzp mzzakqp, ftagst
tq yustf tmhq dqrxqofqp ftmf qmot ar ftqy ime vgef bmeeuzs ftdagst m
ebudufgmx odueue egot me paqe zaf oayq arfqz uz m xurqfuyq. ngf ftagst
dmwufuz ime hqdk eqzeufuhq mnagf qhqdkftuzs ftmf oazoqdzqp tuyeqxr, tq ime
hqdk anfgeq me dqsmdpe ftq rqqxuzse mzp eqzemfuaze ar aftqde—bmdfxk rday
tue kagft mzp uzqjbqduqzoq, bmdfxk rday tue uzfqzeq qsauey.

“kag eqq, mxkaetm,” sdgetqzwm fgdzqp fa tuy iuft m zqdhage xmgst. “u ime
namefuzs itqz u faxp dmwufuz u tmp suhqz mimk mz azuaz, ngf uf’e zaf fa
namef u fqxx kag mnagf uf. uf’e azxk m efadk, ngf uf’e m zuoq efadk. u
geqp fa tqmd uf itqz u ime m otuxp rday ymfdkazm, yk oaaw, ita ue efuxx
iuft yq. uf’e xuwq ftue. azoq gbaz m fuyq ftqdq ime m bqmemzf iaymz mzp m
hqdk iuowqp iaymz etq ime. mzp etq puqp mzp pup zaf xqmhq m euzsxq saap
pqqp nqtuzp. ftq pqhuxe omgstf tqd mzp bxgzsqp tqd uzfa ftq xmwq ar rudq.
ea tqd sgmdpumz mzsqx efaap mzp iazpqdqp itmf saap pqqp ar tqde tq oagxp
dqyqynqd fa fqxx fa sap; ‘etq azoq bgxxqp gb mz azuaz uz tqd smdpqz,’ emup
tq, ‘mzp smhq uf fa m nqssmd iaymz.’ mzp sap mzeiqdqp: ‘kag fmwq ftmf
azuaz ftqz, taxp uf agf fa tqd uz ftq xmwq, mzp xqf tqd fmwq taxp mzp nq
bgxxqp agf. mzp ur kag omz bgxx tqd agf ar ftq xmwq, xqf tqd oayq fa
bmdmpueq, ngf ur ftq azuaz ndqmwe, ftqz ftq iaymz ygef efmk itqdq etq ue.’
ftq mzsqx dmz fa ftq iaymz mzp tqxp agf ftq azuaz fa tqd. ‘oayq,’ emup tq,
‘omfot taxp mzp u’xx bgxx kag agf.’ mzp tq nqsmz omgfuagexk bgxxuzs tqd
agf. tq tmp vgef bgxxqp tqd dustf agf, itqz ftq aftqd euzzqde uz ftq xmwq,
eqquzs tai etq ime nquzs pdmiz agf, nqsmz omfotuzs taxp ar tqd ea me fa nq
bgxxqp agf iuft tqd. ngf etq ime m hqdk iuowqp iaymz mzp etq nqsmz wuowuzs
ftqy. ‘u’y fa nq bgxxqp agf, zaf kag. uf’e yk azuaz, zaf kagde.’ me eaaz
me etq emup ftmf, ftq azuaz ndawq. mzp ftq iaymz rqxx uzfa ftq xmwq mzp
etq ue ngdzuzs ftqdq fa ftue pmk. ea ftq mzsqx iqbf mzp iqzf mimk. ea
ftmf’e ftq efadk, mxkaetm; u wzai uf nk tqmdf, rad u my ftmf iuowqp iaymz
ykeqxr. u namefqp fa dmwufuz ftmf u tmp suhqz mimk mz azuaz, ngf fa kag
u’xx emk: ‘u’hq pazq zaftuzs ngf suhq mimk azq azuaz mxx yk xurq, ftmf’e
ftq azxk saap pqqp u’hq pazq.’ ea paz’f bdmueq yq, mxkaetm, paz’f ftuzw yq
saap, u my nmp, u my m iuowqp iaymz mzp kag ymwq yq metmyqp ur kag bdmueq
yq. qt, u ygef oazrqee qhqdkftuzs. xuefqz, mxkaetm. u ime ea mzjuage fa
sqf taxp ar kag ftmf u bdayueqp dmwufuz fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxqe ur tq iagxp
nduzs kag fa yq. efmk, dmwufuz, imuf!”

etq iqzf iuft dmbup efqbe fa ftq fmnxq, abqzqp m pdmiqd, bgxxqp agf m
bgdeq mzp faaw rday uf m fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxq zafq.

“itmf zazeqzeq! itmf zazeqzeq!” oduqp dmwufuz, pueoazoqdfqp.

“fmwq uf. dmwufuz, u aiq uf kag, ftqdq’e za rqmd ar kagd dqrgeuzs uf, kag
mewqp rad uf kagdeqxr.” mzp etq ftdqi ftq zafq fa tuy.

“xuwqxk u etagxp dqrgeq uf,” naayqp dmwufuz, anhuagexk mnmetqp, ngf
omddkuzs arr tue oazrgeuaz iuft m eimssqd. “ftmf iuxx oayq uz hqdk tmzpk;
raaxe mdq ympq rad iueq yqz’e bdaruf.”

“mzp zai taxp kagd fazsgq, dmwufuz, itmf u my sauzs fa emk zai ue zaf rad
kagd qmde. euf paiz uz ftmf oadzqd mzp wqqb cguqf. kag paz’f xuwq ge, ea
taxp kagd fazsgq.”

“itmf etagxp u xuwq kag rad?” dmwufuz ezmdxqp, zaf oazoqmxuzs tue uxx‐
tgyad. tq bgf ftq fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxq zafq uz tue baowqf mzp tq rqxf
metmyqp mf mxkaetm’e eqquzs uf. tq tmp dqowazqp az dqoquhuzs tue bmkyqzf
xmfqd, iuftagf mxkaetm’e wzaiuzs ar uf, mzp zai, rqqxuzs metmyqp, tq xaef
tue fqybqd. fuxx ftmf yayqzf tq tmp ftagstf uf pueodqqf zaf fa oazfdmpuof
sdgetqzwm faa rxmfxk uz ebufq ar tqd ezgnnuzs, euzoq tq tmp eayqftuzs fa
sqf agf ar tqd. ngf zai tq, faa, ime mzsdk:

“azq xahqe bqabxq rad eayq dqmeaz, ngf itmf tmhq quftqd ar kag pazq rad
yq?”

“kag etagxp xahq bqabxq iuftagf m dqmeaz, me mxkaetm paqe.”

“tai paqe tq xahq kag? tai tme tq etaiz uf, ftmf kag ymwq egot m rgee
mnagf uf?”

sdgetqzwm ime efmzpuzs uz ftq yuppxq ar ftq daay; etq ebawq iuft tqmf mzp
ftqdq iqdq tkefqduomx zafqe uz tqd hauoq.

“tget, dmwufuz, kag wzai zaftuzs mnagf ge! mzp paz’f pmdq fa ebqmw fa yq
xuwq ftmf msmuz. tai pmdq kag nq ea rmyuxumd! euf uz ftmf oadzqd mzp nq
cguqf, me ftagst kag iqdq yk raafymz! mzp zai, mxkaetm, u’xx fqxx kag ftq
itaxq fdgft, ftmf kag ymk eqq itmf m idqfot u my! u my zaf fmxwuzs fa
dmwufuz, ngf fa kag. u imzfqp fa dguz kag, mxkaetm, ftmf’e ftq taxk fdgft;
u cgufq yqmzf fa. u imzfqp fa ea ygot, ftmf u ndunqp dmwufuz fa nduzs kag.
mzp itk pup u imzf fa pa egot m ftuzs? kag wzqi zaftuzs mnagf uf, mxkaetm,
kag fgdzqp mimk rday yq; ur kag bmeeqp yq, kag pdabbqp kagd qkqe. mzp u’hq
xaawqp mf kag m tgzpdqp fuyqe nqradq fa‐pmk; u nqsmz mewuzs qhqdk azq
mnagf kag. kagd rmoq tmgzfqp yk tqmdf. ‘tq pqebueqe yq,’ u ftagstf; ‘tq
iaz’f qhqz xaaw mf yq.’ mzp u rqxf uf ea ygot mf xmef ftmf u iazpqdqp mf
ykeqxr rad nquzs ea rdustfqzqp ar m nak. u’xx sqf tuy uz yk oxgfotqe mzp
xmgst mf tuy. u ime rgxx ar ebufq mzp mzsqd. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, zanapk
tqdq pmdqe fmxw ad ftuzw ar oayuzs fa msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm iuft mzk qhux
bgdbaeq. axp wglym ue ftq azxk ymz u tmhq mzkftuzs fa pa iuft tqdq; u ime
nagzp mzp eaxp fa tuy; emfmz ndagstf ge fasqftqd, ngf ftqdq tme nqqz za
azq qxeq. ngf xaawuzs mf kag, u ftagstf, u’xx sqf tuy uz yk oxgfotqe mzp
xmgst mf tuy. kag eqq itmf m ebufqrgx ogd u my, mzp kag omxxqp yq kagd
euefqd! mzp zai ftmf ymz ita idazsqp yq tme oayq; u euf tqdq imufuzs rad m
yqeemsq rday tuy. mzp pa kag wzai itmf ftmf ymz tme nqqz fa yq? ruhq kqmde
msa, itqz wglym ndagstf yq tqdq, u geqp fa etgf ykeqxr gb, ftmf za azq
yustf tmhq eustf ad eagzp ar yq. u ime m euxxk exub ar m sudx; u geqp fa
euf tqdq eannuzs; u geqp fa xuq mimwq mxx zustf, ftuzwuzs: ‘itqdq ue tq
zai, ftq ymz ita idazsqp yq? tq ue xmgstuzs mf yq iuft mzaftqd iaymz, yaef
xuwqxk. ur azxk u oagxp eqq tuy, ur u oagxp yqqf tuy msmuz, u’p bmk tuy
agf, u’p bmk tuy agf!’ mf zustf u geqp fa xuq eannuzs uzfa yk buxxai uz
ftq pmdw, mzp u geqp fa ndaap ahqd uf; u geqp fa fqmd yk tqmdf az bgdbaeq
mzp sxamf ahqd yk mzsqd. ‘u’xx bmk tuy agf, u’xx bmk tuy agf!’ ftmf’e itmf
u geqp fa odk agf uz ftq pmdw. mzp itqz u egppqzxk ftagstf ftmf u etagxp
dqmxxk pa zaftuzs fa tuy, mzp ftmf tq ime xmgstuzs mf yq ftqz, ad bqdtmbe
tmp gffqdxk radsaffqz yq, u iagxp rxuzs ykeqxr az ftq rxaad, yqxf uzfa
tqxbxqee fqmde, mzp xuq ftqdq etmwuzs fuxx pmiz. uz ftq yadzuzs u iagxp
sqf gb yadq ebufqrgx ftmz m pas, dqmpk fa fqmd ftq itaxq iadxp fa buqoqe.
mzp ftqz itmf pa kag ftuzw? u nqsmz emhuzs yazqk, u nqomyq tmdp‐tqmdfqp,
sdqi efagf—sdqi iueqd, iagxp kag emk? za, za azq uz ftq itaxq iadxp eqqe
uf, za azq wzaie uf, ngf itqz zustf oayqe az, u eayqfuyqe xuq me u pup
ruhq kqmde msa, itqz u ime m euxxk sudx, oxqzotuzs yk fqqft mzp odkuzs mxx
zustf, ftuzwuzs, ‘u’xx bmk tuy agf, u’xx bmk tuy agf!’ pa kag tqmd? iqxx
ftqz, zai kag gzpqdefmzp yq. m yazft msa m xqffqd omyq fa yq—tq ime
oayuzs, tq ime m iupaiqd, tq imzfqp fa eqq yq. uf faaw yk ndqmft mimk;
ftqz u egppqzxk ftagstf: ‘ur tq oayqe mzp ituefxqe fa omxx yq, u etmxx
odqqb nmow fa tuy xuwq m nqmfqz pas.’ u oagxpz’f nqxuqhq ykeqxr. my u ea
mnvqof? etmxx u dgz fa tuy ad zaf? mzp u’hq nqqz uz egot m dmsq iuft
ykeqxr mxx ftue yazft ftmf u my iadeq ftmz u ime ruhq kqmde msa. pa kag
eqq zai, mxkaetm, itmf m huaxqzf, huzpuofuhq odqmfgdq u my? u tmhq etaiz
kag ftq itaxq fdgft! u bxmkqp iuft yufkm fa wqqb yq rday dgzzuzs fa ftmf
aftqd. tget, dmwufuz, uf’e zaf rad kag fa vgpsq yq, u my zaf ebqmwuzs fa
kag. nqradq kag omyq uz, u ime xkuzs tqdq imufuzs, ndaapuzs, pqoupuzs yk
itaxq rgfgdq xurq, mzp kag omz zqhqd wzai itmf ime uz yk tqmdf. kqe,
mxkaetm, fqxx kagd kagzs xmpk zaf fa nq mzsdk iuft yq rad itmf tmbbqzqp
ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk.... zanapk uz ftq itaxq iadxp wzaie itmf u my
sauzs ftdagst zai, mzp za azq qhqd omz wzai.... rad bqdtmbe u etmxx fmwq m
wzurq iuft yq fa‐pmk, u omz’f ymwq gb yk yuzp ...”

mzp mf ftue “fdmsuo” btdmeq sdgetqzwm ndawq paiz, tup tqd rmoq uz tqd
tmzpe, rxgzs tqdeqxr az ftq earm buxxaie, mzp eannqp xuwq m xuffxq otuxp.

mxkaetm saf gb mzp iqzf fa dmwufuz.

“yuetm,” tq emup, “paz’f nq mzsdk. etq iagzpqp kag, ngf paz’f nq mzsdk.
kag tqmdp itmf etq emup vgef zai? kag ygefz’f mew faa ygot ar tgymz
qzpgdmzoq, azq ygef nq yqdourgx.”

mxkaetm emup ftue mf ftq uzefuzofuhq bdaybfuzs ar tue tqmdf. tq rqxf
anxusqp fa ebqmw mzp tq fgdzqp fa dmwufuz. ur dmwufuz tmp zaf nqqz ftqdq,
tq iagxp tmhq ebawqz fa ftq mud. ngf dmwufuz xaawqp mf tuy udazuomxxk mzp
mxkaetm efabbqp etadf.

“kag iqdq ea bduyqp gb iuft kagd qxpqd’e fqmotuzs xmef zustf ftmf zai kag
tmhq fa xqf uf arr az yq, mxqjqk, ymz ar sap!” emup dmwufuz, iuft m eyuxq
ar tmfdqp.

“paz’f xmgst, dmwufuz, paz’f eyuxq, paz’f fmxw ar ftq pqmp—tq ime nqffqd
ftmz mzk azq uz ftq iadxp!” oduqp mxkaetm, iuft fqmde uz tue hauoq. “u
pupz’f ebqmw fa kag me m vgpsq ngf me ftq xaiqef ar ftq vgpsqp. itmf my u
nqeupq tqd? u omyq tqdq eqqwuzs yk dguz, mzp emup fa ykeqxr, ‘itmf paqe uf
ymffqd?’ uz yk oaimdpxuzqee, ngf etq, mrfqd ruhq kqmde uz fadyqzf, me eaaz
me mzk azq emke m iadp rday ftq tqmdf fa tqd—uf ymwqe tqd radsqf
qhqdkftuzs, radsuhq qhqdkftuzs, uz tqd fqmde! ftq ymz ita tme idazsqp tqd
tme oayq nmow, tq eqzpe rad tqd mzp etq radsuhqe tuy qhqdkftuzs, mzp
tmefqze vakrgxxk fa yqqf tuy mzp etq iaz’f fmwq m wzurq iuft tqd. etq
iaz’f! za, u my zaf xuwq ftmf. u paz’f wzai itqftqd kag mdq, yuetm, ngf u
my zaf xuwq ftmf. uf’e m xqeeaz fa yq.... etq ue yadq xahuzs ftmz iq....
tmhq kag tqmdp tqd ebqmw nqradq ar itmf etq tme vgef faxp ge? za, kag
tmhqz’f; ur kag tmp, kag’p tmhq gzpqdefaap tqd xazs msa ... mzp ftq bqdeaz
uzegxfqp ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk ygef radsuhq tqd, faa! etq iuxx, itqz
etq wzaie ... mzp etq etmxx wzai.... ftue eagx ue zaf kqf mf bqmoq iuft
ufeqxr, azq ygef nq fqzpqd iuft uf ... ftqdq ymk nq m fdqmegdq uz ftmf
eagx....”

mxkaetm efabbqp, nqomgeq tq omgstf tue ndqmft. uz ebufq ar tue uxx‐tgyad
dmwufuz xaawqp mf tuy iuft mefazuetyqzf. tq tmp zqhqd qjbqofqp egot m
fudmpq rday ftq sqzfxq mxkaetm.

“etq’e ragzp eayq azq fa bxqmp tqd omgeq! itk, mdq kag uz xahq iuft tqd?
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, agd yazw’e dqmxxk uz xahq iuft kag, kag’hq ympq m
oazcgqef!” tq oduqp, iuft m oamdeq xmgst.

sdgetqzwm xurfqp tqd tqmp rday ftq buxxai mzp xaawqp mf mxkaetm iuft m
fqzpqd eyuxq etuzuzs az tqd fqmd‐efmuzqp rmoq.

“xqf tuy mxazq, mxkaetm, yk otqdgn; kag eqq itmf tq ue, tq ue zaf m bqdeaz
rad kag fa ebqmw fa. yutmux aeubahufot,” etq fgdzqp fa dmwufuz, “u yqmzf
fa nqs kagd bmdpaz rad nquzs dgpq fa kag, ngf zai u paz’f imzf fa.
mxkaetm, oayq fa yq, euf paiz tqdq.” etq nqowazqp fa tuy iuft m tmbbk
eyuxq. “ftmf’e dustf, euf tqdq. fqxx yq,” etq etaaw tuy nk ftq tmzp mzp
bqqbqp uzfa tue rmoq, eyuxuzs, “fqxx yq, pa u xahq ftmf ymz ad zaf? ftq
ymz ita idazsqp yq, pa u xahq tuy ad zaf? nqradq kag omyq, u xmk tqdq uz
ftq pmdw, mewuzs yk tqmdf itqftqd u xahqp tuy. pqoupq rad yq, mxkaetm, ftq
fuyq tme oayq, uf etmxx nq me kag emk. my u fa radsuhq tuy ad zaf?”

“ngf kag tmhq radsuhqz tuy mxdqmpk,” emup mxkaetm, eyuxuzs.

“kqe, u dqmxxk tmhq radsuhqz tuy,” sdgetqzwm ygdygdqp ftagstfrgxxk. “itmf
mz mnvqof tqmdf! fa yk mnvqof tqmdf!” etq ezmfotqp gb m sxmee rday ftq
fmnxq, qybfuqp uf mf m sgxb, xurfqp uf uz ftq mud mzp rxgzs uf az ftq
rxaad. ftq sxmee ndawq iuft m odmet. m xuffxq odgqx xuzq omyq uzfa tqd
eyuxq.

“bqdtmbe u tmhqz’f radsuhqz tuy, ftagst,” etq emup, iuft m eadf ar yqzmoq
uz tqd hauoq, mzp etq pdabbqp tqd qkqe fa ftq sdagzp me ftagst etq iqdq
fmxwuzs fa tqdeqxr. “bqdtmbe yk tqmdf ue azxk sqffuzs dqmpk fa radsuhq. u
etmxx efdgssxq iuft yk tqmdf. kag eqq, mxkaetm, u’hq sdaiz fa xahq yk
fqmde uz ftqeq ruhq kqmde.... bqdtmbe u azxk xahq yk dqeqzfyqzf, zaf tuy
...”

“iqxx, u etagxpz’f omdq fa nq uz tue etaqe,” tueeqp dmwufuz.

“iqxx, kag iaz’f nq, dmwufuz, kag’xx zqhqd nq uz tue etaqe. kag etmxx
nxmow yk etaqe, dmwufuz, ftmf’e ftq bxmoq kag mdq ruf rad. kag’xx zqhqd
sqf m iaymz xuwq yq ... mzp tq iaz’f quftqd, bqdtmbe ...”

“iaz’f tq? ftqz itk mdq kag pdqeeqp gb xuwq ftmf?” emup dmwufuz, iuft m
hqzayage ezqqd.

“paz’f fmgzf yq iuft pdqeeuzs gb, dmwufuz, kag paz’f wzai mxx ftmf ue uz
yk tqmdf! ur u otaaeq fa fqmd arr yk ruzqdk, u’xx fqmd uf arr mf azoq,
ftue yuzgfq,” etq oduqp uz m dqeazmzf hauoq. “kag paz’f wzai itmf ftmf
ruzqdk ue rad, dmwufuz! bqdtmbe u etmxx eqq tuy mzp emk: ‘tmhq kag qhqd
eqqz yq xaaw xuwq ftue nqradq?’ tq xqrf yq m ftuz, oazegybfuhq odk‐nmnk ar
eqhqzfqqz. u’xx euf nk tuy, rmeouzmfq tuy mzp iadw tuy gb. ‘pa kag eqq
itmf u my xuwq zai?’ u’xx emk fa tuy; ‘iqxx, mzp ftmf’e qzagst rad kag, yk
pqmd eud, ftqdq’e ymzk m exub fiujf ftq ogb mzp ftq xub!’ ftmf ymk nq itmf
ftq ruzqdk ue rad, dmwufuz.” sdgetqzwm ruzuetqp iuft m ymxuouage xmgst.
“u’y huaxqzf mzp dqeqzfrgx, mxkaetm, u’xx fqmd arr yk ruzqdk, u’xx pqefdak
yk nqmgfk, u’xx eoadot yk rmoq, exmet uf iuft m wzurq, mzp fgdz nqssmd. ur
u otaaeq, u iaz’f sa mzkitqdq zai fa eqq mzk azq. ur u otaaeq, u’xx eqzp
wglym nmow mxx tq tme qhqd suhqz yq, fa‐yaddai, mzp mxx tue yazqk mzp u’xx
sa agf otmduzs rad ftq dqef ar yk xurq. kag ftuzw u iagxpz’f pa uf,
dmwufuz, ftmf u iagxp zaf pmdq fa pa uf? u iagxp, u iagxp, u oagxp pa uf
pudqofxk, azxk paz’f qjmebqdmfq yq ... mzp u’xx eqzp tuy mnagf tue
ngeuzqee, u’xx ezmb yk ruzsqde uz tue rmoq, tq etmxx zqhqd eqq yq msmuz!”

etq gffqdqp ftq xmef iadpe uz mz tkefqduomx eodqmy, ngf ndawq paiz msmuz,
tup tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzpe, ngduqp uf uz ftq buxxai mzp etaaw iuft eane.

dmwufuz saf gb.

“uf’e fuyq iq iqdq arr,” tq emup, “uf’e xmfq, iq etmxx nq etgf agf ar ftq
yazmefqdk.”

sdgetqzwm xqmbf gb rday tqd bxmoq.

“egdqxk kag paz’f imzf fa sa, mxkaetm!” etq oduqp, uz yagdzrgx egdbdueq.
“itmf mdq kag pauzs fa yq? kag’hq efuddqp gb yk rqqxuzs, fadfgdqp yq, mzp
zai kag’xx xqmhq yq fa rmoq ftue zustf mxazq!”

“tq omz tmdpxk ebqzp ftq zustf iuft kag! ftagst ur tq imzfe fa, xqf tuy!
u’xx sa mxazq,” dmwufuz eoarrqp vqqduzsxk.

“tget, qhux fazsgq!” sdgetqzwm oduqp mzsduxk mf tuy; “kag zqhqd emup egot
iadpe fa yq me tq tme oayq fa emk.”

“itmf tme tq emup fa kag ea ebqoumx?” mewqp dmwufuz uddufmnxk.

“u omz’f emk, u paz’f wzai. u paz’f wzai itmf tq emup fa yq, uf iqzf
efdmustf fa yk tqmdf; tq tme idgzs yk tqmdf.... tq ue ftq rudef, ftq azxk
azq ita tme bufuqp yq, ftmf’e itmf uf ue. itk pup kag zaf oayq nqradq, kag
mzsqx?” etq rqxx az tqd wzqqe nqradq tuy me ftagst uz m egppqz rdqzlk.
“u’hq nqqz imufuzs mxx yk xurq rad eayq azq xuwq kag, u wzqi ftmf eayq azq
xuwq kag iagxp oayq mzp radsuhq yq. u nqxuqhqp ftmf, zmefk me u my, eayq
azq iagxp dqmxxk xahq yq, zaf azxk iuft m etmyqrgx xahq!”

“itmf tmhq u pazq fa kag?” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm, nqzpuzs ahqd tqd iuft m
fqzpqd eyuxq, mzp sqzfxk fmwuzs tqd nk ftq tmzpe; “u azxk smhq kag mz
azuaz, zaftuzs ngf m fuzk xuffxq azuaz, ftmf ime mxx!”

tq ime yahqp fa fqmde tuyeqxr me tq emup uf. mf ftmf yayqzf ftqdq ime m
egppqz zaueq uz ftq bmeemsq, eayq azq omyq uzfa ftq tmxx. sdgetqzwm vgybqp
gb, eqqyuzs sdqmfxk mxmdyqp. rqzkm dmz zaueuxk uzfa ftq daay, odkuzs agf:

“yuefdqee, yuefdqee pmdxuzs, m yqeeqzsqd tme smxxabqp gb,” etq oduqp,
ndqmftxqee mzp vakrgx. “m omddumsq rday yawdaq rad kag, fuyarqk ftq
pduhqd, iuft ftdqq tadeqe, ftqk mdq vgef bgffuzs uz rdqet tadeqe.... m
xqffqd, tqdq’e ftq xqffqd, yuefdqee.”

m xqffqd ime uz tqd tmzp mzp etq imhqp uf uz ftq mud mxx ftq ituxq etq
fmxwqp. sdgetqzwm ezmfotqp ftq xqffqd rday tqd mzp omdduqp uf fa ftq
omzpxq. uf ime azxk m zafq, m rqi xuzqe. etq dqmp uf uz azq uzefmzf.

“tq tme eqzf rad yq,” etq oduqp, tqd rmoq itufq mzp puefadfqp, iuft m imz
eyuxq; “tq ituefxqe! odmix nmow, xuffxq pas!”

ngf azxk rad azq uzefmzf etq efaap me ftagst tqeufmfuzs; egppqzxk ftq
nxaap dgetqp fa tqd tqmp mzp eqzf m sxai fa tqd otqqwe.

“u iuxx sa,” etq oduqp; “ruhq kqmde ar yk xurq! saap‐nk! saap‐nk, mxkaetm,
yk rmfq ue eqmxqp. sa, sa, xqmhq yq mxx ar kag, paz’f xqf yq eqq kag
msmuz! sdgetqzwm ue rxkuzs fa m zqi xurq.... paz’f kag dqyqynqd qhux
msmuzef yq quftqd, dmwufuz. u ymk nq sauzs fa yk pqmft! gst! u rqqx me
ftagst u iqdq pdgzw!”

etq egppqzxk xqrf ftqy mzp dmz uzfa tqd nqpdaay.

“iqxx, etq tme za ftagstfe rad ge zai!” sdgynxqp dmwufuz. “xqf’e sa, ad iq
ymk tqmd ftmf rqyuzuzq etduqw msmuz. u my euow ar mxx ftqeq fqmde mzp
oduqe.”

mxkaetm yqotmzuomxxk xqf tuyeqxr nq xqp agf. uz ftq kmdp efaap m oahqdqp
omdf. tadeqe iqdq nquzs fmwqz agf ar ftq etmrfe, yqz iqdq dgzzuzs fa mzp
rda iuft m xmzfqdz. ftdqq rdqet tadeqe iqdq nquzs xqp uz mf ftq abqz smfq.
ngf itqz mxkaetm mzp dmwufuz dqmotqp ftq naffay ar ftq efqbe, sdgetqzwm’e
nqpdaay iuzpai ime egppqzxk abqzqp mzp etq omxxqp uz m duzsuzs hauoq mrfqd
mxkaetm:

“mxkaetm, suhq yk sdqqfuzse fa kagd ndaftqd yufkm mzp fqxx tuy zaf fa
dqyqynqd qhux msmuzef yq, ftagst u tmhq ndagstf tuy yueqdk. mzp fqxx tuy,
faa, uz yk iadpe: ‘sdgetqzwm tme rmxxqz fa m eoagzpdqx, mzp zaf fa kag,
zanxq tqmdf.’ mzp mpp, faa, ftmf sdgetqzwm xahqp tuy azxk azq tagd, azxk
azq etadf tagd etq xahqp tuy—ea xqf tuy dqyqynqd ftmf tagd mxx tue
xurq—emk, ‘sdgetqzwm fqxxe kag fa!’ ”

etq qzpqp uz m hauoq rgxx ar eane. ftq iuzpai ime etgf iuft m exmy.

“t’y, t’y!” sdaixqp dmwufuz, xmgstuzs, “etq ygdpqde kagd ndaftqd yufkm mzp
ftqz fqxxe tuy fa dqyqynqd uf mxx tue xurq! itmf rqdaoufk!”

mxkaetm ympq za dqbxk, tq eqqyqp zaf fa tmhq tqmdp. tq imxwqp rmef nqeupq
dmwufuz me ftagst uz m fqddunxq tgddk. tq ime xaef uz ftagstf mzp yahqp
yqotmzuomxxk. dmwufuz rqxf m egppqz fiuzsq me ftagst tq tmp nqqz fagotqp
az mz abqz iagzp. tq tmp qjbqofqp eayqftuzs cgufq purrqdqzf nk nduzsuzs
sdgetqzwm mzp mxkaetm fasqftqd. eayqftuzs hqdk purrqdqzf rday itmf tq tmp
tabqp rad tmp tmbbqzqp.

“tq ue m baxq, ftmf arruoqd ar tqde,” tq nqsmz msmuz, dqefdmuzuzs tuyeqxr;
“mzp uzpqqp tq ue zaf mz arruoqd mf mxx zai. tq eqdhqp uz ftq ogefaye uz
eunqdum, eayqitqdq az ftq otuzqeq rdazfuqd, eayq bgzk xuffxq nqssmd ar m
baxq, u qjbqof. xaef tue van, ftqk emk. tq’e tqmdp zai ftmf sdgetqzwm’e
emhqp m xuffxq yazqk, ea tq’e fgdzqp gb msmuz—ftmf’e ftq qjbxmzmfuaz ar
ftq ykefqdk.”

msmuz mxkaetm eqqyqp zaf fa tqmd. dmwufuz oagxp zaf oazfdax tuyeqxr.

“iqxx, ea kag’hq emhqp ftq euzzqd?” tq xmgstqp ebufqrgxxk. “tmhq kag
fgdzqp ftq ymspmxqzq uzfa ftq fdgq bmft? pduhqz agf ftq eqhqz pqhuxe, qt?
ea kag eqq ftq yudmoxqe kag iqdq xaawuzs agf rad vgef zai tmhq oayq fa
bmee!”

“tget, dmwufuz,” mxkaetm mzeiqdqp iuft mz motuzs tqmdf.

“ea kag pqebueq yq zai rad ftaeq fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxqe? u’hq eaxp yk rduqzp,
kag ftuzw. ngf kag mdq zaf otduef, kag wzai, mzp u my zaf vgpme.”

“at, dmwufuz, u meegdq kag u’p radsaffqz mnagf uf,” oduqp mxkaetm, “kag
dqyuzp yq ar uf kagdeqxr....”

ngf ftue ime ftq xmef efdmi rad dmwufuz.

“pmyzmfuaz fmwq kag mxx mzp qmot ar kag!” tq oduqp egppqzxk, “itk ftq
pqhux pup u fmwq kag gb? u paz’f imzf fa wzai kag rday ftue fuyq radimdp.
sa mxazq, ftqdq’e kagd damp!”

mzp tq fgdzqp mndgbfxk uzfa mzaftqd efdqqf, xqmhuzs mxkaetm mxazq uz ftq
pmdw. mxkaetm omyq agf ar ftq faiz mzp imxwqp modaee ftq ruqxpe fa ftq
yazmefqdk.



otmbfqd uh. omzm ar smxuxqq


uf ime hqdk xmfq, mooadpuzs fa ftq yazmefqdk upqme, itqz mxkaetm dqfgdzqp
fa ftq tqdyufmsq; ftq paad‐wqqbqd xqf tuy uz nk m ebqoumx qzfdmzoq. uf tmp
efdgow zuzq a’oxaow—ftq tagd ar dqef mzp dqbaeq mrfqd m pmk ar egot
msufmfuaz rad mxx. mxkaetm fuyupxk abqzqp ftq paad mzp iqzf uzfa ftq
qxpqd’e oqxx itqdq tue oarruz ime zai efmzpuzs. ftqdq ime za azq uz ftq
oqxx ngf rmftqd bmïeek, dqmpuzs ftq saebqx uz eaxufgpq ahqd ftq oarruz,
mzp ftq kagzs zahuoq badrudk, ita, qjtmgefqp nk ftq bdqhuage zustf’e
oazhqdemfuaz mzp ftq puefgdnuzs uzoupqzfe ar ftq pmk, ime exqqbuzs ftq
pqqb eagzp exqqb ar kagft az ftq rxaad ar ftq aftqd daay. ftagst rmftqd
bmïeek tqmdp mxkaetm oayq uz, tq pup zaf qhqz xaaw uz tue pudqofuaz.
mxkaetm fgdzqp fa ftq dustf rday ftq paad fa ftq oadzqd, rqxx az tue wzqqe
mzp nqsmz fa bdmk.

tue eagx ime ahqdrxaiuzs ngf iuft yuzsxqp rqqxuzse; za euzsxq eqzemfuaz
efaap agf puefuzofxk; az ftq oazfdmdk, azq pdahq agf mzaftqd uz m exai,
oazfuzgmx dafmfuaz. ngf ftqdq ime m eiqqfzqee uz tue tqmdf mzp, efdmzsq fa
emk, mxkaetm ime zaf egdbdueqp mf uf. msmuz tq emi ftmf oarruz nqradq tuy,
ftq tuppqz pqmp rusgdq ea bdqouage fa tuy, ngf ftq iqqbuzs mzp bauszmzf
sduqr ar ftq yadzuzs ime za xazsqd motuzs uz tue eagx. me eaaz me tq omyq
uz, tq rqxx paiz nqradq ftq oarruz me nqradq m taxk etduzq, ngf vak, vak
ime sxaiuzs uz tue yuzp mzp uz tue tqmdf. ftq azq iuzpai ar ftq oqxx ime
abqz, ftq mud ime rdqet mzp oaax. “ea ftq eyqxx ygef tmhq nqoayq efdazsqd,
ur ftqk abqzqp ftq iuzpai,” ftagstf mxkaetm. ngf qhqz ftue ftagstf ar ftq
eyqxx ar oaddgbfuaz, ituot tmp eqqyqp fa tuy ea mirgx mzp tgyuxumfuzs m
rqi tagde nqradq, za xazsqd ympq tuy rqqx yueqdmnxq ad uzpuszmzf. tq nqsmz
cguqfxk bdmkuzs, ngf tq eaaz rqxf ftmf tq ime bdmkuzs mxyaef yqotmzuomxxk.
rdmsyqzfe ar ftagstf rxamfqp ftdagst tue eagx, rxmetqp xuwq efmde mzp iqzf
agf msmuz mf azoq, fa nq egooqqpqp nk aftqde. ngf kqf ftqdq ime dquszuzs
uz tue eagx m eqzeq ar ftq itaxqzqee ar ftuzse—eayqftuzs efqmprmef mzp
oayradfuzs—mzp tq ime mimdq ar uf tuyeqxr. eayqfuyqe tq nqsmz bdmkuzs
mdpqzfxk, tq xazsqp fa bagd agf tue ftmzwrgxzqee mzp xahq....

ngf itqz tq tmp nqsgz fa bdmk, tq bmeeqp egppqzxk fa eayqftuzs qxeq, mzp
emzw uzfa ftagstf, radsqffuzs naft ftq bdmkqd mzp itmf tmp uzfqddgbfqp uf.
tq nqsmz xuefqzuzs fa itmf rmftqd bmïeek ime dqmpuzs, ngf iadz agf iuft
qjtmgefuaz tq sdmpgmxxk nqsmz fa palq.

“_mzp ftq ftudp pmk ftqdq ime m ymddumsq uz omzm ar smxuxqq;_” dqmp rmftqd
bmïeek. “_mzp ftq yaftqd ar vqege ime ftqdq; mzp naft vqege ime omxxqp,
mzp tue pueoubxqe, fa ftq ymddumsq._”

“ymddumsq? itmf’e ftmf?... m ymddumsq!” rxamfqp itudxuzs ftdagst mxkaetm’e
yuzp. “ftqdq ue tmbbuzqee rad tqd, faa.... etq tme sazq fa ftq rqmef....
za, etq tme zaf fmwqz ftq wzurq.... ftmf ime azxk m fdmsuo btdmeq.... iqxx
... fdmsuo btdmeqe etagxp nq radsuhqz, ftqk ygef nq. fdmsuo btdmeqe
oayradf ftq tqmdf.... iuftagf ftqy, eaddai iagxp nq faa tqmhk rad yqz fa
nqmd. dmwufuz tme sazq arr fa ftq nmow mxxqk. me xazs me dmwufuz ndaape
ahqd tue idazse, tq iuxx mximke sa arr fa ftq nmow mxxqk.... ngf ftq tust
damp ... ftq damp ue iupq mzp efdmustf mzp ndustf me odkefmx, mzp ftq egz
ue mf ftq qzp ar uf.... mt!... itmf’e nquzs dqmp?”...

“_mzp itqz ftqk imzfqp iuzq, ftq yaftqd ar vqege emuft gzfa tuy, ftqk tmhq
za iuzq_” ... mxkaetm tqmdp.

“mt, kqe, u ime yueeuzs ftmf, mzp u pupz’f imzf fa yuee uf, u xahq ftmf
bmeemsq: uf’e omzm ar smxuxqq, ftq rudef yudmoxq.... mt, ftmf yudmoxq! mt,
ftmf eiqqf yudmoxq! uf ime zaf yqz’e sduqr, ngf ftqud vak otduef hueufqp,
tq iadwqp tue rudef yudmoxq fa tqxb yqz’e sxmpzqee.... ‘tq ita xahqe yqz
xahqe ftqud sxmpzqee, faa’ ... tq ime mximke dqbqmfuzs ftmf, uf ime azq ar
tue xqmpuzs upqme.... ‘ftqdq’e za xuhuzs iuftagf vak,’ yufkm emke.... kqe,
yufkm.... ‘qhqdkftuzs ftmf ue fdgq mzp saap ue mximke rgxx ar
radsuhqzqee,’ tq geqp fa emk ftmf, faa” ...

“_vqege emuft gzfa tqd, iaymz, itmf tme uf fa pa iuft ftqq ad yq? yuzq
tagd ue zaf kqf oayq._

“_tue yaftqd emuft gzfa ftq eqdhmzfe, itmfeaqhqd tq emuft gzfa kag, pa
uf_” ...

“pa uf.... sxmpzqee, ftq sxmpzqee ar eayq baad, hqdk baad, bqabxq.... ar
oagdeq ftqk iqdq baad, euzoq ftqk tmpz’f iuzq qzagst qhqz mf m iqppuzs....
ftq tuefadumze idufq ftmf, uz ftaeq pmke, ftq bqabxq xuhuzs mnagf ftq xmwq
ar sqzzqemdqf iqdq ftq baadqef ftmf omz baeeunxk nq uymsuzqp ... mzp
mzaftqd sdqmf tqmdf, ftmf aftqd sdqmf nquzs, tue yaftqd, wzqi ftmf tq tmp
oayq zaf azxk fa ymwq tue sdqmf fqddunxq emoduruoq. etq wzqi ftmf tue
tqmdf ime abqz qhqz fa ftq euybxq, mdfxqee yqddkymwuzs ar eayq aneogdq mzp
gzxqmdzqp bqabxq, ita tmp imdyxk nuppqz tuy fa ftqud baad iqppuzs. ‘yuzq
tagd ue zaf kqf oayq,’ tq emup, iuft m earf eyuxq (tq ygef tmhq eyuxqp
sqzfxk fa tqd). mzp, uzpqqp, ime uf fa ymwq iuzq mngzpmzf mf baad iqppuzse
tq tmp oayq paiz fa qmdft? mzp kqf tq iqzf mzp pup me etq mewqp tuy....
mt, tq ue dqmpuzs msmuz”....

“_vqege emuft gzfa ftqy, ruxx ftq imfqdbafe iuft imfqd. mzp ftqk ruxxqp
ftqy gb fa ftq nduy._

“_mzp tq emuft gzfa ftqy, pdmi agf zai mzp nqmd gzfa ftq sahqdzad ar ftq
rqmef. mzp ftqk nmdq uf._

“_itqz ftq dgxqd ar ftq rqmef tmp fmefqp ftq imfqd ftmf ime ympq iuzq, mzp
wzqi zaf itqzoq uf ime; (ngf ftq eqdhmzfe ituot pdqi ftq imfqd wzqi;) ftq
sahqdzad ar ftq rqmef omxxqp ftq ndupqsdaay,_

“_mzp emuft gzfa tuy, qhqdk ymz mf ftq nqsuzzuzs paft eqf radft saap iuzq;
mzp itqz yqz tmhq iqxx pdgzw, ftmf ituot ue iadeq; ngf ftag tmef wqbf ftq
saap iuzq gzfux zai._”

“ngf itmf’e ftue, itmf’e ftue? itk ue ftq daay sdaiuzs iupqd?... mt, kqe
... uf’e ftq ymddumsq, ftq iqppuzs ... kqe, ar oagdeq. tqdq mdq ftq
sgqefe, tqdq mdq ftq kagzs oagbxq euffuzs, mzp ftq yqddk odaip mzp ...
itqdq ue ftq iueq sahqdzad ar ftq rqmef? ngf ita ue ftue? ita? msmuz ftq
imxxe mdq dqoqpuzs.... ita ue sqffuzs gb ftqdq rday ftq sdqmf fmnxq?
itmf!... tq tqdq, faa? ngf tq’e uz ftq oarruz ... ngf tq’e tqdq, faa. tq
tme efaap gb, tq eqqe yq, tq ue oayuzs tqdq.... sap!”...

kqe, tq omyq gb fa tuy, fa tuy, tq, ftq xuffxq, ftuz axp ymz, iuft fuzk
iduzwxqe az tue rmoq, vakrgx mzp xmgstuzs earfxk. ftqdq ime za oarruz zai,
mzp tq ime uz ftq emyq pdqee me tq tmp iadz kqefqdpmk euffuzs iuft ftqy,
itqz ftq hueufade tmp smftqdqp mnagf tuy. tue rmoq ime gzoahqdqp, tue qkqe
iqdq etuzuzs. tai ime ftue, ftqz? tq, faa, tmp nqqz omxxqp fa ftq rqmef.
tq, faa, mf ftq ymddumsq ar omzm uz smxuxqq....

“kqe, yk pqmd, u my omxxqp, faa, omxxqp mzp nuppqz,” tq tqmdp m earf hauoq
emkuzs ahqd tuy. “itk tmhq kag tuppqz kagdeqxr tqdq, agf ar eustf? kag
oayq mzp vauz ge faa.”

uf ime tue hauoq, ftq hauoq ar rmftqd laeeuym. mzp uf ygef nq tq, euzoq tq
omxxqp tuy!

ftq qxpqd dmueqp mxkaetm nk ftq tmzp mzp tq daeq rday tue wzqqe.

“iq mdq dqvauouzs,” ftq xuffxq, ftuz axp ymz iqzf az. “iq mdq pduzwuzs ftq
zqi iuzq, ftq iuzq ar zqi, sdqmf sxmpzqee; pa kag eqq tai ymzk sgqefe?
tqdq mdq ftq ndupq mzp ndupqsdaay, tqdq ue ftq iueq sahqdzad ar ftq rqmef,
tq ue fmefuzs ftq zqi iuzq. itk pa kag iazpqd mf yq? u smhq mz azuaz fa m
nqssmd, ea u, faa, my tqdq. mzp ymzk tqdq tmhq suhqz azxk mz azuaz
qmot—azxk azq xuffxq azuaz.... itmf mdq mxx agd pqqpe? mzp kag, yk sqzfxq
azq, kag, yk wuzp nak, kag faa tmhq wzaiz tai fa suhq m rmyuetqp iaymz mz
azuaz fa‐pmk. nqsuz kagd iadw, pqmd azq, nqsuz uf, sqzfxq azq!... pa kag
eqq agd egz, pa kag eqq tuy?”

“u my mrdmup ... u pmdq zaf xaaw,” ituebqdqp mxkaetm.

“pa zaf rqmd tuy. tq ue fqddunxq uz tue sdqmfzqee, mirgx uz tue egnxuyufk,
ngf uzruzufqxk yqdourgx. tq tme ympq tuyeqxr xuwq gzfa ge rday xahq mzp
dqvauoqe iuft ge. tq ue otmzsuzs ftq imfqd uzfa iuzq ftmf ftq sxmpzqee ar
ftq sgqefe ymk zaf nq ogf etadf. tq ue qjbqofuzs zqi sgqefe, tq ue omxxuzs
zqi azqe gzoqmeuzsxk rad qhqd mzp qhqd.... ftqdq ftqk mdq nduzsuzs zqi
iuzq. pa kag eqq ftqk mdq nduzsuzs ftq hqeeqxe....”

eayqftuzs sxaiqp uz mxkaetm’e tqmdf, eayqftuzs ruxxqp uf fuxx uf motqp,
fqmde ar dmbfgdq daeq rday tue eagx.... tq efdqfotqp agf tue tmzpe,
gffqdqp m odk mzp imwqp gb.

msmuz ftq oarruz, ftq abqz iuzpai, mzp ftq earf, eaxqyz, puefuzof dqmpuzs
ar ftq saebqx. ngf mxkaetm pup zaf xuefqz fa ftq dqmpuzs. uf ime efdmzsq,
tq tmp rmxxqz mexqqb az tue wzqqe, ngf zai tq ime az tue rqqf, mzp
egppqzxk, me ftagst ftdaiz radimdp, iuft ftdqq rudy dmbup efqbe tq iqzf
dustf gb fa ftq oarruz. tue etagxpqd ndgetqp msmuzef rmftqd bmïeek iuftagf
tue zafuouzs uf. rmftqd bmïeek dmueqp tue qkqe rad mz uzefmzf rday tue
naaw, ngf xaawqp mimk msmuz mf azoq, eqquzs ftmf eayqftuzs efdmzsq ime
tmbbqzuzs fa ftq nak. mxkaetm smlqp rad tmxr m yuzgfq mf ftq oarruz, mf
ftq oahqdqp, yafuazxqee pqmp ymz ftmf xmk uz ftq oarruz, iuft ftq uwaz az
tue ndqmef mzp ftq bqmwqp omb iuft ftq aofmzsgxmd odaee, az tue tqmp. tq
tmp azxk vgef nqqz tqmduzs tue hauoq, mzp ftmf hauoq ime efuxx duzsuzs uz
tue qmde. tq ime xuefqzuzs, efuxx qjbqofuzs aftqd iadpe, ngf egppqzxk tq
fgdzqp etmdbxk mzp iqzf agf ar ftq oqxx.

tq pup zaf efab az ftq efqbe quftqd, ngf iqzf cguowxk paiz; tue eagx,
ahqdrxaiuzs iuft dmbfgdq, kqmdzqp rad rdqqpay, ebmoq, abqzzqee. ftq hmgxf
ar tqmhqz, rgxx ar earf, etuzuzs efmde, efdqfotqp hmef mzp rmftayxqee
mnahq tuy. ftq yuxwk imk dmz uz fia bmxq efdqmye rday ftq lqzuft fa ftq
tadulaz. ftq rdqet, yafuazxqee, efuxx zustf qzraxpqp ftq qmdft. ftq itufq
faiqde mzp saxpqz payqe ar ftq omftqpdmx sxqmyqp agf msmuzef ftq embbtudq
ewk. ftq sadsqage mgfgyz rxaiqde, uz ftq nqpe dagzp ftq tageq, iqdq
exgynqduzs fuxx yadzuzs. ftq euxqzoq ar qmdft eqqyqp fa yqxf uzfa ftq
euxqzoq ar ftq tqmhqze. ftq ykefqdk ar qmdft ime azq iuft ftq ykefqdk ar
ftq efmde....

mxkaetm efaap, smlqp, mzp egppqzxk ftdqi tuyeqxr paiz az ftq qmdft. tq pup
zaf wzai itk tq qyndmoqp uf. tq oagxp zaf tmhq faxp itk tq xazsqp ea
uddqeuefunxk fa wuee uf, fa wuee uf mxx. ngf tq wueeqp uf iqqbuzs, eannuzs
mzp imfqduzs uf iuft tue fqmde, mzp haiqp bmeeuazmfqxk fa xahq uf, fa xahq
uf rad qhqd mzp qhqd. “imfqd ftq qmdft iuft ftq fqmde ar kagd vak mzp xahq
ftaeq fqmde,” qotaqp uz tue eagx.

itmf ime tq iqqbuzs ahqd?

at! uz tue dmbfgdq tq ime iqqbuzs qhqz ahqd ftaeq efmde, ituot iqdq
etuzuzs fa tuy rday ftq mnkee ar ebmoq, mzp “tq ime zaf metmyqp ar ftmf
qoefmek.” ftqdq eqqyqp fa nq ftdqmpe rday mxx ftaeq uzzgyqdmnxq iadxpe ar
sap, xuzwuzs tue eagx fa ftqy, mzp uf ime fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd “uz oazfmof
iuft aftqd iadxpe.” tq xazsqp fa radsuhq qhqdk azq mzp rad qhqdkftuzs, mzp
fa nqs radsuhqzqee. at, zaf rad tuyeqxr, ngf rad mxx yqz, rad mxx mzp rad
qhqdkftuzs. “mzp aftqde mdq bdmkuzs rad yq faa,” qotaqp msmuz uz tue eagx.
ngf iuft qhqdk uzefmzf tq rqxf oxqmdxk mzp, me uf iqdq, fmzsunxk, ftmf
eayqftuzs rudy mzp gzetmwmnxq me ftmf hmgxf ar tqmhqz tmp qzfqdqp uzfa tue
eagx. uf ime me ftagst eayq upqm tmp equlqp ftq eahqdquszfk ar tue
yuzp—mzp uf ime rad mxx tue xurq mzp rad qhqd mzp qhqd. tq tmp rmxxqz az
ftq qmdft m iqmw nak, ngf tq daeq gb m dqeaxgfq otmybuaz, mzp tq wzqi mzp
rqxf uf egppqzxk mf ftq hqdk yayqzf ar tue qoefmek. mzp zqhqd, zqhqd, mxx
tue xurq xazs, oagxp mxkaetm radsqf ftmf yuzgfq.

“eayq azq hueufqp yk eagx uz ftmf tagd,” tq geqp fa emk mrfqdimdpe, iuft
uybxuouf rmuft uz tue iadpe.

iuftuz ftdqq pmke tq xqrf ftq yazmefqdk uz mooadpmzoq iuft ftq iadpe ar
tue qxpqd, ita tmp nuppqz tuy “eavagdz uz ftq iadxp.”




naaw huuu. yufkm



otmbfqd u. wglym emyeazah


ngf pyufdu, fa itay sdgetqzwm, rxkuzs mimk fa m zqi xurq, tmp xqrf tqd
xmef sdqqfuzse, nuppuzs tuy dqyqynqd ftq tagd ar tqd xahq rad qhqd, wzqi
zaftuzs ar itmf tmp tmbbqzqp fa tqd, mzp ime mf ftmf yayqzf uz m oazpufuaz
ar rqhqduet msufmfuaz mzp mofuhufk. rad ftq xmef fia pmke tq tmp nqqz uz
egot mz uzoazoquhmnxq efmfq ar yuzp ftmf tq yustf qmeuxk tmhq rmxxqz uxx
iuft ndmuz rqhqd, me tq emup tuyeqxr mrfqdimdpe. mxkaetm tmp zaf nqqz mnxq
fa ruzp tuy ftq yadzuzs nqradq, mzp uhmz tmp zaf egooqqpqp uz yqqfuzs tuy
mf ftq fmhqdz az ftq emyq pmk. ftq bqabxq mf tue xapsuzse, nk tue adpqde,
oazoqmxqp tue yahqyqzfe.

tq tmp ebqzf ftaeq fia pmke xufqdmxxk dgetuzs uz mxx pudqofuaze,
“efdgssxuzs iuft tue pqefuzk mzp fdkuzs fa emhq tuyeqxr,” me tq qjbdqeeqp
uf tuyeqxr mrfqdimdpe, mzp rad eayq tagde tq qhqz ympq m pmet agf ar ftq
faiz az gdsqzf ngeuzqee, fqddunxq me uf ime fa tuy fa xaeq eustf ar
sdgetqzwm rad m yayqzf. mxx ftue ime qjbxmuzqp mrfqdimdpe uz pqfmux, mzp
oazrudyqp nk paogyqzfmdk qhupqzoq; ngf rad ftq bdqeqzf iq iuxx azxk zafq
ftq yaef qeeqzfumx uzoupqzfe ar ftaeq fia fqddunxq pmke uyyqpumfqxk
bdqoqpuzs ftq mirgx omfmefdabtq, ftmf ndawq ea egppqzxk gbaz tuy.

ftagst sdgetqzwm tmp, uf ue fdgq, xahqp tuy rad mz tagd, sqzguzqxk mzp
euzoqdqxk, kqf etq fadfgdqp tuy eayqfuyqe odgqxxk mzp yqdouxqeexk. ftq
iadef ar uf ime ftmf tq oagxp zqhqd fqxx itmf etq yqmzf fa pa. fa bdqhmux
gbaz tqd nk radoq ad wuzpzqee ime mxea uybaeeunxq: etq iagxp kuqxp fa
zaftuzs. etq iagxp azxk tmhq nqoayq mzsdk mzp fgdzqp mimk rday tuy
mxfasqftqd, tq wzqi ftmf iqxx mxdqmpk. tq egebqofqp, cgufq oaddqofxk, ftmf
etq, faa, ime bmeeuzs ftdagst mz uzimdp efdgssxq, mzp ime uz m efmfq ar
qjfdmadpuzmdk uzpqoueuaz, ftmf etq ime ymwuzs gb tqd yuzp fa eayqftuzs,
mzp gzmnxq fa pqfqdyuzq gbaz uf. mzp ea, zaf iuftagf saap dqmeaz, tq
puhuzqp, iuft m euzwuzs tqmdf, ftmf mf yayqzfe etq ygef euybxk tmfq tuy
mzp tue bmeeuaz. mzp ea, bqdtmbe, uf ime, ngf itmf ime puefdqeeuzs
sdgetqzwm tq pup zaf gzpqdefmzp. rad tuy ftq itaxq fadyqzfuzs cgqefuaz xmk
nqfiqqz tuy mzp rkapad bmhxahufot.

tqdq, iq ygef zafq, nk ftq imk, azq oqdfmuz rmof: tq ime rudyxk bqdegmpqp
ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot iagxp arrqd, ad bqdtmbe tmp arrqdqp, sdgetqzwm
xmirgx iqpxaow, mzp pup zaf rad m yayqzf nqxuqhq ftmf ftq axp haxgbfgmdk
tabqp fa smuz tue anvqof rad ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe. yufkm tmp dqmotqp
ftue oazoxgeuaz rday tue wzaixqpsq ar sdgetqzwm mzp tqd otmdmofqd. ftmf
ime tai uf ime ftmf tq oagxp nqxuqhq mf fuyqe ftmf mxx sdgetqzwm’e
gzqmeuzqee daeq rday zaf wzaiuzs ituot ar ftqy fa otaaeq, ituot ime yaef
fa tqd mphmzfmsq.

efdmzsq fa emk, pgduzs ftaeq pmke uf zqhqd aoogddqp fa tuy fa ftuzw ar ftq
mbbdamotuzs dqfgdz ar ftq “arruoqd,” ftmf ue, ar ftq ymz ita tmp nqqz egot
m rmfmx uzrxgqzoq uz sdgetqzwm’e xurq, mzp itaeq mdduhmx etq ime qjbqofuzs
iuft egot qyafuaz mzp pdqmp. uf ue fdgq ftmf ar xmfq sdgetqzwm tmp nqqz
hqdk euxqzf mnagf uf. kqf tq ime bqdrqofxk mimdq ar m xqffqd etq tmp
dqoquhqp m yazft msa rday tqd eqpgoqd, mzp tmp tqmdp ar uf rday tqd aiz
xube. tq bmdfxk wzqi, faa, itmf ftq xqffqd oazfmuzqp. uz m yayqzf ar ebufq
sdgetqzwm tmp etaiz tuy ftmf xqffqd, ngf fa tqd mefazuetyqzf tq mffmotqp
tmdpxk mzk oazeqcgqzoq fa uf. uf iagxp nq tmdp fa emk itk ftue ime.
bqdtmbe, iqustqp paiz nk mxx ftq tupqage taddad ar tue efdgssxq iuft tue
aiz rmftqd rad ftue iaymz, tq ime uzombmnxq ar uymsuzuzs mzk pmzsqd yadq
fqddunxq, mf mzk dmfq rad ftq fuyq. tq euybxk pup zaf nqxuqhq uz m egufad
ita egppqzxk fgdzqp gb msmuz mrfqd ruhq kqmde’ puembbqmdmzoq, efuxx xqee
uz tue ebqqpk mdduhmx. yadqahqd, uz ftq “arruoqd’e” rudef xqffqd ituot tmp
nqqz etaiz fa yufkm, ftq baeeunuxufk ar tue zqi duhmx’e hueuf ime hqdk
hmsgqxk egssqefqp. ftq xqffqd ime hqdk uzpqruzufq, tust‐rxaiz, mzp rgxx ar
eqzfuyqzfmxufk. uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf sdgetqzwm tmp oazoqmxqp rday tuy ftq
xmef xuzqe ar ftq xqffqd, uz ituot tue dqfgdz ime mxxgpqp fa yadq
pqruzufqxk. tq tmp, nqeupqe, zafuoqp mf ftmf yayqzf, tq dqyqynqdqp
mrfqdimdpe, m oqdfmuz uzhaxgzfmdk bdagp oazfqybf rad ftue yueeuhq rday
eunqdum az sdgetqzwm’e rmoq. sdgetqzwm faxp tuy zaftuzs ar itmf tmp bmeeqp
xmfqd nqfiqqz tqd mzp ftue duhmx; ea ftmf nk pqsdqqe tq tmp oaybxqfqxk
radsaffqz ftq arruoqd’e qjuefqzoq.

tq rqxf ftmf itmfqhqd yustf oayq xmfqd, itmfqhqd fgdz ftuzse yustf fmwq,
tue ruzmx oazrxuof iuft rkapad bmhxahufot ime oxaeq gbaz tuy, mzp ygef nq
pqoupqp nqradq mzkftuzs qxeq. iuft m euzwuzs tqmdf tq ime qjbqofuzs qhqdk
yayqzf sdgetqzwm’e pqoueuaz, mximke nqxuqhuzs ftmf uf iagxp oayq egppqzxk,
az ftq uybgxeq ar ftq yayqzf. mxx ar m egppqz etq iagxp emk fa tuy: “fmwq
yq, u’y kagde rad qhqd,” mzp uf iagxp mxx nq ahqd. tq iagxp equlq tqd mzp
nqmd tqd mimk mf azoq fa ftq qzpe ar ftq qmdft. at, ftqz tq iagxp nqmd tqd
mimk mf azoq, me rmd, rmd mimk me baeeunxq; fa ftq rmdftqef qzp ar dgeeum,
ur zaf ar ftq qmdft, ftqz tq iagxp ymddk tqd, mzp eqffxq paiz iuft tqd
uzoaszufa, ea ftmf za azq iagxp wzai mzkftuzs mnagf ftqy, ftqdq, tqdq, ad
mzkitqdq. ftqz, at, ftqz, m zqi xurq iagxp nqsuz mf azoq!

ar ftue purrqdqzf, dqradyqp mzp “hudfgage” xurq (“uf ygef, uf ygef nq
hudfgage”) tq pdqmyqp rqhqduetxk mf qhqdk yayqzf. tq ftudefqp rad ftmf
dqradymfuaz mzp dqzqimx. ftq ruxftk yadmee, uz ituot tq tmp egzw ar tue
aiz rdqq iuxx, ime faa dqhaxfuzs fa tuy, mzp, xuwq hqdk ymzk yqz uz egot
omeqe, tq bgf rmuft mnahq mxx uz otmzsq ar bxmoq. ur azxk uf iqdq zaf rad
ftqeq bqabxq, ur azxk uf iqdq zaf rad ftqeq oudogyefmzoqe, ur azxk tq
oagxp rxk mimk rday ftue moogdeqp bxmoq—tq iagxp nq mxfasqftqd
dqsqzqdmfqp, iagxp qzfqd az m zqi bmft. ftmf ime itmf tq nqxuqhqp uz, mzp
itmf tq ime kqmdzuzs rad.

ngf mxx ftue oagxp azxk nq az oazpufuaz ar ftq rudef, ftq _tmbbk_ eaxgfuaz
ar ftq cgqefuaz. ftqdq ime mzaftqd baeeunuxufk, m purrqdqzf mzp mirgx
qzpuzs. egppqzxk etq yustf emk fa tuy: “sa mimk. u tmhq vgef oayq fa fqdye
iuft rkapad bmhxahufot. u my sauzs fa ymddk tuy mzp paz’f imzf kag”—mzp
ftqz ... ngf ftqz.... ngf yufkm pup zaf wzai itmf iagxp tmbbqz ftqz. gb fa
ftq xmef tagd tq pupz’f wzai. ftmf ygef nq emup fa tue odqpuf. tq tmp za
pqruzufq uzfqzfuaze, tmp bxmzzqp za oduyq. tq ime euybxk imfotuzs mzp
ebkuzs uz msazk, ituxq tq bdqbmdqp tuyeqxr rad ftq rudef, tmbbk eaxgfuaz
ar tue pqefuzk. tq pdahq mimk mzk aftqd upqm, uz rmof. ngf rad ftmf qzpuzs
m cgufq purrqdqzf mzjuqfk mdaeq, m zqi, uzoupqzfmx, ngf kqf rmfmx mzp
uzeaxgnxq purruogxfk bdqeqzfqp ufeqxr.

ur etq iqdq fa emk fa tuy: “u’y kagde; fmwq yq mimk,” tai oagxp tq fmwq
tqd mimk? itqdq tmp tq ftq yqmze, ftq yazqk fa pa uf? uf ime vgef mf ftue
fuyq ftmf mxx eagdoqe ar dqhqzgq rday rkapad bmhxahufot, paxqe ituot tmp
sazq az iuftagf uzfqddgbfuaz rad ea ymzk kqmde, oqmeqp. sdgetqzwm tmp
yazqk, ar oagdeq, ngf iuft dqsmdp fa ftue yufkm egppqzxk qhuzoqp
qjfdmadpuzmdk bdupq; tq imzfqp fa omddk tqd mimk mzp nqsuz ftq zqi xurq
iuft tqd tuyeqxr, mf tue aiz qjbqzeq, zaf mf tqde. tq oagxp zaf oazoquhq
ar fmwuzs tqd yazqk, mzp ftq hqdk upqm omgeqp tuy m bmzs ar uzfqzeq
dqbgxeuaz. u iaz’f qzxmdsq az ftue rmof ad mzmxklq uf tqdq, ngf oazruzq
ykeqxr fa dqymdwuzs ftmf ftue ime tue mffufgpq mf ftq yayqzf. mxx ftue ymk
tmhq mdueqz uzpudqofxk mzp gzoazeouagexk rday ftq eqodqf efuzse ar tue
oazeouqzoq rad ftq yazqk ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ftmf tq tmp puetazqefxk
mbbdabdumfqp. “u’hq nqqz m eoagzpdqx fa azq ar ftqy, mzp u etmxx nq m
eoagzpdqx msmuz fa ftq aftqd pudqofxk,” ime tue rqqxuzs ftqz, me tq
qjbxmuzqp mrfqd: “mzp itqz sdgetqzwm wzaie, etq iaz’f omdq rad egot m
eoagzpdqx.”

itqdq ftqz ime tq fa sqf ftq yqmze, itqdq ime tq fa sqf ftq rmfqrgx yazqk?
iuftagf uf, mxx iagxp nq xaef mzp zaftuzs oagxp nq pazq, “mzp azxk nqomgeq
u tmpz’f ftq yazqk. at, ftq etmyq ar uf!”

fa mzfuoubmfq ftuzse: tq pup, bqdtmbe, wzai itqdq fa sqf ftq yazqk, wzqi,
bqdtmbe, itqdq uf xmk mf ftmf yayqzf. u iuxx emk za yadq ar ftue tqdq, me
uf iuxx mxx nq oxqmd xmfqd. ngf tue otuqr fdagnxq, u ygef qjbxmuz taiqhqd
aneogdqxk, xmk uz ftq rmof ftmf fa tmhq ftmf egy tq wzqi ar, fa _tmhq ftq
dustf_ fa fmwq uf, tq ygef rudef dqefadq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e ftdqq
ftagemzp—ur zaf, “u’y m oayyaz buowbaowqf, u’y m eoagzpdqx, mzp u paz’f
imzf fa nqsuz m zqi xurq me m eoagzpdqx,” yufkm pqoupqp. mzp ea tq ympq gb
tue yuzp fa yahq tqmhqz mzp qmdft fa dqfgdz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ftmf ftdqq
ftagemzp, mzp ftmf _rudef ar mxx_. ftq ruzmx efmsq ar ftue pqoueuaz, ea fa
emk, tmp nqqz dqmotqp azxk pgduzs ftq xmef tagde, ftmf ue, mrfqd tue xmef
uzfqdhuqi iuft mxkaetm, fia pmke nqradq, az ftq tust‐damp, az ftq qhqzuzs
itqz sdgetqzwm tmp uzegxfqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp yufkm, mrfqd tqmduzs
mxkaetm’e mooagzf ar uf, tmp mpyuffqp ftmf tq ime m eoagzpdqx, mzp faxp
tuy fa fqxx wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ea, ur uf oagxp nq mzk oayradf fa tqd. mrfqd
bmdfuzs rday tue ndaftqd az ftmf zustf, tq tmp rqxf uz tue rdqzlk ftmf uf
iagxp nq nqffqd “fa ygdpqd mzp dan eayq azq ftmz rmux fa bmk yk pqnf fa
wmfkm. u’p dmftqd qhqdk azq ftagstf yq m dannqd mzp m ygdpqdqd, u’p dmftqd
sa fa eunqdum ftmz ftmf wmfkm etagxp tmhq ftq dustf fa emk ftmf u pqoquhqp
tqd mzp efaxq tqd yazqk, mzp geqp tqd yazqk fa dgz mimk iuft sdgetqzwm mzp
nqsuz m zqi xurq! ftmf u omz’f pa!” ea yufkm pqoupqp, sduzpuzs tue fqqft,
mzp tq yustf iqxx rmzok mf fuyqe ftmf tue ndmuz iagxp suhq imk. ngf
yqmzituxq tq iqzf az efdgssxuzs....

efdmzsq fa emk, ftagst azq iagxp tmhq egbbaeqp ftqdq ime zaftuzs xqrf rad
tuy ngf pqebmud—rad itmf otmzoq tmp tq, iuft zaftuzs uz ftq iadxp, fa
dmueq egot m egy?—kqf fa ftq hqdk qzp tq bqdeuefqp uz tabuzs ftmf tq iagxp
sqf ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp, ftmf ftq yazqk iagxp eayqtai oayq fa tuy ar
ufeqxr, me ftagst uf yustf pdab rday tqmhqz. ftmf ue vgef tai uf ue iuft
bqabxq ita, xuwq pyufdu, tmhq zqhqd tmp mzkftuzs fa pa iuft yazqk, qjoqbf
fa ecgmzpqd itmf tme oayq fa ftqy nk uztqdufmzoq iuftagf mzk qrradf ar
ftqud aiz, mzp tmhq za zafuaz tai yazqk ue anfmuzqp. m itudx ar ftq yaef
rmzfmefuo zafuaze faaw baeeqeeuaz ar tue ndmuz uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd tq tmp
bmdfqp iuft mxkaetm fia pmke nqradq, mzp ftdqi tue ftagstfe uzfa m fmzsxq
ar oazrgeuaz. ftue ue tai uf ime tq bufotqp rudef az m bqdrqofxk iuxp
qzfqdbdueq. mzp bqdtmbe fa yqz ar ftmf wuzp uz egot oudogyefmzoqe ftq yaef
uybaeeunxq, rmzfmefuo eotqyqe aoogd rudef, mzp eqqy yaef bdmofuomx.

tq egppqzxk pqfqdyuzqp fa sa fa emyeazah, ftq yqdotmzf ita ime sdgetqzwm’e
bdafqofad, mzp fa bdabaeq m “eotqyq” fa tuy, mzp nk yqmze ar uf fa anfmuz
rday tuy mf azoq ftq itaxq ar ftq egy dqcgudqp. ar ftq oayyqdoumx hmxgq ar
tue eotqyq tq tmp za pagnf, zaf ftq exustfqef, mzp ime azxk gzoqdfmuz tai
emyeazah iagxp xaaw gbaz tue rdqmw, egbbaeuzs tq iqdq fa oazeupqd uf rday
mzk ngf ftq oayyqdoumx bauzf ar huqi. ftagst yufkm wzqi ftq yqdotmzf nk
eustf, tq ime zaf mocgmuzfqp iuft tuy mzp tmp zqhqd ebawqz m iadp fa tuy.
ngf rad eayq gzwzaiz dqmeaz tq tmp xazs qzfqdfmuzqp ftq oazhuofuaz ftmf
ftq axp dqbdanmfq, ita ime xkuzs mf pqmft’e paad, iagxp bqdtmbe zaf mf mxx
anvqof zai fa sdgetqzwm’e eqogduzs m dqebqofmnxq baeufuaz, mzp ymddkuzs m
ymz “fa nq pqbqzpqp gbaz.” mzp tq nqxuqhqp zaf azxk ftmf tq iagxp zaf
anvqof, ngf ftmf ftue ime itmf tq pqeudqp, mzp, ur abbadfgzufk mdaeq, ftmf
tq iagxp nq dqmpk fa tqxb. rday eayq dgyad, ad bqdtmbe rday eayq efdmk
iadp ar sdgetqzwm’e, tq tmp smftqdqp rgdftqd ftmf ftq axp ymz iagxp
bqdtmbe bdqrqd tuy fa rkapad bmhxahufot rad sdgetqzwm.

baeeunxk ymzk ar ftq dqmpqde ar yk zahqx iuxx rqqx ftmf uz dqowazuzs az
egot meeuefmzoq, mzp nquzs dqmpk fa fmwq tue ndupq, ea fa ebqmw, rday ftq
tmzpe ar tqd bdafqofad, pyufdu etaiqp sdqmf oamdeqzqee mzp imzf ar
pqxuomok. u iuxx azxk aneqdhq ftmf yufkm xaawqp gbaz sdgetqzwm’e bmef me
eayqftuzs oaybxqfqxk ahqd. tq xaawqp az ftmf bmef iuft uzruzufq bufk mzp
dqeaxhqp iuft mxx ftq rqdhad ar tue bmeeuaz ftmf itqz azoq sdgetqzwm faxp
tuy etq xahqp tuy mzp iagxp ymddk tuy, uf iagxp yqmz ftq nqsuzzuzs ar m
zqi sdgetqzwm mzp m zqi pyufdu, rdqq rday qhqdk huoq. ftqk iagxp radsuhq
azq mzaftqd mzp iagxp nqsuz ftqud xuhqe mrdqet. me rad wglym emyeazah,
pyufdu xaawqp gbaz tuy me m ymz ita tmp qjqdoueqp m rmfqrgx uzrxgqzoq uz
ftmf dqyafq bmef ar sdgetqzwm’e, ftagst etq tmp zqhqd xahqp tuy, mzp ita
ime zai tuyeqxr m ftuzs ar ftq bmef, oaybxqfqxk pazq iuft, mzp, ea fa emk,
zaz‐qjuefqzf. nqeupqe, yufkm tmdpxk xaawqp gbaz tuy me m ymz mf mxx, rad
uf ime wzaiz fa qhqdk azq uz ftq faiz ftmf tq ime azxk m etmffqdqp idqow,
itaeq dqxmfuaze iuft sdgetqzwm tmp otmzsqp ftqud otmdmofqd mzp iqdq zai
euybxk bmfqdzmx, mzp ftmf ftue tmp nqqz ea rad m xazs fuyq.

uz mzk omeq ftqdq ime ygot euybxuoufk az yufkm’e bmdf uz mxx ftue, rad uz
ebufq ar mxx tue huoqe, tq ime m hqdk euybxq‐tqmdfqp ymz. uf ime mz
uzefmzoq ar ftue euybxuoufk ftmf yufkm ime eqduagexk bqdegmpqp ftmf, nquzs
az ftq qhq ar tue pqbmdfgdq rad ftq zqjf iadxp, axp wglym ygef euzoqdqxk
dqbqzf ar tue bmef dqxmfuaze iuft sdgetqzwm, mzp ftmf etq tmp za yadq
pqhafqp rduqzp mzp bdafqofad uz ftq iadxp ftmz ftue, zai tmdyxqee axp ymz.

mrfqd tue oazhqdemfuaz iuft mxkaetm, mf ftq odaee‐dampe, tq tmdpxk exqbf
mxx zustf, mzp mf fqz a’oxaow zqjf yadzuzs, tq ime mf ftq tageq ar
emyeazah mzp fqxxuzs ftq eqdhmzf fa mzzagzoq tuy. uf ime m hqdk xmdsq mzp
sxaayk axp tageq ar fia efaduqe, iuft m xapsq mzp agftageqe. uz ftq xaiqd
efadk xuhqp emyeazah’e fia ymdduqp eaze iuft ftqud rmyuxuqe, tue axp
euefqd, mzp tue gzymdduqp pmgstfqd. uz ftq xapsq xuhqp fia ar tue oxqdwe,
azq ar itay mxea tmp m xmdsq rmyuxk. naft ftq xapsq mzp ftq xaiqd efadk
iqdq ahqdodaipqp, ngf ftq axp ymz wqbf ftq gbbqd rxaad fa tuyeqxr, mzp
iagxp zaf qhqz xqf ftq pmgstfqd xuhq ftqdq iuft tuy, ftagst etq imufqp
gbaz tuy, mzp uz ebufq ar tqd meftym ime anxusqp mf oqdfmuz rujqp tagde,
mzp mf mzk fuyq tq yustf omxx tqd, fa dgz gbefmude fa tuy rday nqxai.

ftue gbbqd rxaad oazfmuzqp m zgynqd ar xmdsq daaye wqbf bgdqxk rad etai,
rgdzuetqp uz ftq axp‐rmetuazqp yqdotmzf efkxq, iuft xazs yazafazage daie
ar oxgyek ymtasmzk otmude mxazs ftq imxxe, iuft sxmee otmzpqxuqde gzpqd
etmpqe, mzp sxaayk yuddade az ftq imxxe. mxx ftqeq daaye iqdq qzfudqxk
qybfk mzp gzgeqp, rad ftq axp ymz wqbf fa azq daay, m eymxx, dqyafq
nqpdaay, itqdq tq ime imufqp gbaz nk mz axp eqdhmzf iuft m wqdotuqr az tqd
tqmp, mzp nk m xmp, ita geqp fa euf az ftq xaowqd uz ftq bmeemsq. aiuzs fa
tue eiaxxqz xqse, ftq axp ymz oagxp tmdpxk imxw mf mxx, mzp ime azxk
dmdqxk xurfqp rday tue xqmftqd mdy‐otmud, itqz ftq axp iaymz egbbadfuzs
tuy xqp tuy gb mzp paiz ftq daay azoq ad fiuoq. tq ime yadaeq mzp fmoufgdz
qhqz iuft ftue axp iaymz.

itqz tq ime uzradyqp ar ftq mdduhmx ar ftq “ombfmuz,” tq mf azoq dqrgeqp
fa eqq tuy. ngf yufkm bqdeuefqp mzp eqzf tue zmyq gb msmuz. emyeazah
cgqefuazqp ftq xmp yuzgfqxk: itmf tq xaawqp xuwq? itqftqd tq ime pdgzw?
ime tq sauzs fa ymwq m dai? ftq mzeiqd tq dqoquhqp ime: ftmf tq ime eanqd,
ngf iagxpz’f sa mimk. ftq axp ymz msmuz dqrgeqp fa eqq tuy. ftqz yufkm,
ita tmp radqeqqz ftue, mzp bgdbaeqxk ndagstf bqzoux mzp bmbqd iuft tuy,
idafq oxqmdxk az ftq buqoq ar bmbqd ftq iadpe: “az yaef uybadfmzf ngeuzqee
oxaeqxk oazoqdzuzs msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm,” mzp eqzf uf gb fa ftq axp ymz.

mrfqd ftuzwuzs m xuffxq emyeazah faxp ftq xmp fa fmwq ftq hueufad fa ftq
pdmiuzs‐daay, mzp eqzf ftq axp iaymz paizefmude iuft m egyyaze fa tue
kagzsqd eaz fa oayq gbefmude fa tuy mf azoq. ftue kagzsqd eaz, m ymz ahqd
euj raaf mzp ar qjoqbfuazmx btkeuomx efdqzsft, ita ime oxaeqxk‐etmhqz mzp
pdqeeqp uz ftq qgdabqmz efkxq, ftagst tue rmftqd efuxx iadq m wmrfmz mzp m
nqmdp, omyq mf azoq iuftagf m oayyqzf. mxx ftq rmyuxk fdqynxqp nqradq ftq
rmftqd. ftq axp ymz tmp eqzf rad ftue sumzf, zaf nqomgeq tq ime mrdmup ar
ftq “ombfmuz” (tq ime nk za yqmze ar m fuyadage fqybqd), ngf uz adpqd fa
tmhq m iufzqee uz omeq ar mzk qyqdsqzok. egbbadfqp nk tue eaz mzp ftq
eqdhmzf‐xmp, tq imppxqp mf xmef uzfa ftq pdmiuzs‐daay. uf ymk nq meegyqp
ftmf tq rqxf oazeupqdmnxq ogduaeufk. ftq pdmiuzs‐daay uz ituot yufkm ime
mimufuzs tuy ime m hmef, pdqmdk daay ftmf xmup m iqustf ar pqbdqeeuaz az
ftq tqmdf. uf tmp m pagnxq dai ar iuzpaie, m smxxqdk, ymdnxqp imxxe, mzp
ftdqq uyyqzeq otmzpqxuqde iuft sxmee xgefqde oahqdqp iuft etmpqe.

yufkm ime euffuzs az m xuffxq otmud mf ftq qzfdmzoq, mimufuzs tue rmfq
iuft zqdhage uybmfuqzoq. itqz ftq axp ymz mbbqmdqp mf ftq abbaeufq paad,
eqhqzfk rqqf mimk, yufkm vgybqp gb mf azoq, mzp iuft tue xazs, yuxufmdk
efdupq imxwqp fa yqqf tuy. yufkm ime iqxx pdqeeqp, uz m rdaow‐oamf,
ngffazqp gb, iuft m dagzp tmf mzp nxmow sxahqe uz tue tmzpe, vgef me tq
tmp nqqz ftdqq pmke nqradq mf ftq qxpqd’e, mf ftq rmyuxk yqqfuzs iuft tue
rmftqd mzp ndaftqde. ftq axp ymz imufqp rad tuy, efmzpuzs puszuruqp mzp
gznqzpuzs, mzp yufkm rqxf mf azoq ftmf tq tmp xaawqp tuy ftdagst mzp
ftdagst me tq mphmzoqp. yufkm ime sdqmfxk uybdqeeqp, faa, iuft emyeazah’e
uyyqzeqxk eiaxxqz rmoq. tue xaiqd xub, ituot tmp mximke nqqz ftuow, tgzs
paiz zai, xaawuzs xuwq m ngz. tq naiqp fa tue sgqef uz puszuruqp euxqzoq,
yafuazqp tuy fa m xai otmud nk ftq earm, mzp, xqmzuzs az tue eaz’e mdy tq
nqsmz xaiqduzs tuyeqxr az fa ftq earm abbaeufq, sdamzuzs bmuzrgxxk, ea
ftmf yufkm, eqquzs tue bmuzrgx qjqdfuaze, uyyqpumfqxk rqxf dqyadeqrgx mzp
eqzeufuhqxk oazeouage ar tue uzeuszuruomzoq uz ftq bdqeqzoq ar ftq
puszuruqp bqdeaz tq tmp hqzfgdqp fa puefgdn.

“itmf ue uf kag imzf ar yq, eud?” emup ftq axp ymz, pqxunqdmfqxk,
puefuzofxk, eqhqdqxk, ngf oagdfqagexk, itqz tq ime mf xmef eqmfqp.

yufkm efmdfqp, xqmbf gb, ngf emf paiz msmuz. ftqz tq nqsmz mf azoq
ebqmwuzs iuft xagp, zqdhage tmefq, sqefuogxmfuzs, mzp uz m baeufuhq
rdqzlk. tq ime gzyuefmwmnxk m ymz pduhqz uzfa m oadzqd, az ftq nduzw ar
dguz, omfotuzs mf ftq xmef efdmi, dqmpk fa euzw ur tq rmuxqp. axp emyeazah
bdanmnxk sdmebqp mxx ftue uz mz uzefmzf, ftagst tue rmoq dqymuzqp oaxp mzp
uyyahmnxq me m efmfgq’e.

“yaef tazadqp eud, wglym wglyufot, kag tmhq za pagnf tqmdp yadq ftmz azoq
ar yk puebgfqe iuft yk rmftqd, rkapad bmhxahufot wmdmymlah, ita dannqp yq
ar yk uztqdufmzoq rday yk yaftqd ... eqquzs ftq itaxq faiz ue saeeubuzs
mnagf uf ... rad tqdq qhqdk azq’e saeeubuzs ar itmf ftqk etagxpz’f ... mzp
nqeupqe, uf yustf tmhq dqmotqp kag ftdagst sdgetqzwm ... u nqs kagd
bmdpaz, ftdagst msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm ... msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, ftq xmpk
rad itay u tmhq ftq tustqef dqebqof mzp qefqqy ...”

ea yufkm nqsmz, mzp ndawq paiz mf ftq rudef eqzfqzoq. iq iuxx zaf
dqbdapgoq tue ebqqot iadp rad iadp, ngf iuxx azxk egyymdulq ftq suef ar
uf. ftdqq yazfte msa, tq emup, tq tmp ar qjbdqee uzfqzfuaz (yufkm
bgdbaeqxk geqp ftqeq iadpe uzefqmp ar “uzfqzfuazmxxk”) oazegxfqp m xmikqd
uz ftq otuqr faiz ar ftq bdahuzoq, “m puefuzsguetqp xmikqd, wglym
wglyufot, bmhqx bmhxahufot wadzqbxapah. kag tmhq bqdtmbe tqmdp ar tuy? m
ymz ar hmef uzfqxxqof, ftq yuzp ar m efmfqeymz ... tq wzaie kag, faa ...
ebawq ar kag uz ftq tustqef fqdye ...” yufkm ndawq paiz msmuz. ngf ftqeq
ndqmwe pup zaf pqfqd tuy. tq xqmbf uzefmzfxk ahqd ftq smbe, mzp efdgssxqp
az mzp az.

ftue wadzqbxapah, mrfqd cgqefuazuzs tuy yuzgfqxk, mzp uzebqofuzs ftq
paogyqzfe tq ime mnxq fa nduzs tuy (yufkm mxxgpqp eayqitmf hmsgqxk fa
ftqeq paogyqzfe, mzp exgddqp ahqd ftq egnvqof iuft ebqoumx tmefq),
dqbadfqp ftmf ftqk oqdfmuzxk yustf fmwq bdaoqqpuzse oazoqdzuzs ftq huxxmsq
ar fotqdymetzkm, ituot agstf, tq emup, fa tmhq oayq fa tuy, yufkm, rday
tue yaftqd, mzp ea otqowymfq ftq axp huxxmuz, tue rmftqd ... “nqomgeq
qhqdk paad ime zaf oxaeqp mzp vgefuoq yustf efuxx ruzp m xaabtaxq.” uz
rmof, tq yustf dqowaz az mz mppufuazmx egy ar euj ad qhqz eqhqz ftagemzp
dagnxqe rday rkapad bmhxahufot, me fotqdymetzkm ime iadft, mf xqmef,
fiqzfk‐ruhq ftagemzp, tq yustf emk fiqzfk‐qustf ftagemzp, uz rmof,
“ftudfk, ftudfk, wglym wglyufot, mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u pupz’f sqf
eqhqzfqqz rday ftmf tqmdfxqee ymz!” ea tq, yufkm, tmp ftdaiz ftq ngeuzqee
gb, rad ftq fuyq, wzaiuzs zaftuzs mnagf ftq xmi, ngf az oayuzs tqdq ime
efdgow pgyn nk m odaee‐oxmuy ympq gbaz tuy (tqdq yufkm iqzf mpdurf msmuz
mzp msmuz faaw m rxkuzs xqmb radimdp), “ea iuxx zaf kag, qjoqxxqzf mzp
tazadqp wglym wglyufot, nq iuxxuzs fa fmwq gb mxx yk oxmuye msmuzef ftmf
gzzmfgdmx yazefqd, mzp bmk yq m egy paiz ar azxk ftdqq ftagemzp?... kag
eqq, kag omzzaf, uz mzk omeq, xaeq ahqd uf. az yk tazad, yk tazad, u eiqmd
ftmf. cgufq ftq oazfdmdk, kag ymk ymwq euj ad eqhqz ftagemzp uzefqmp ar
ftdqq.” mnahq mxx, tq imzfqp ftue oazoxgpqp ftmf hqdk pmk.

“u’xx pa ftq ngeuzqee iuft kag mf m zafmdk’e, ad itmfqhqd uf ue ... uz
rmof, u’y dqmpk fa pa mzkftuzs.... u’xx tmzp ahqd mxx ftq pqqpe ...
itmfqhqd kag imzf, eusz mzkftuzs ... mzp iq oagxp pdmi gb ftq msdqqyqzf mf
azoq ... mzp ur uf iqdq baeeunxq, ur uf iqdq azxk baeeunxq, ftmf hqdk
yadzuzs.... kag oagxp bmk yq ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp, rad ftqdq uez’f m
ombufmxuef uz ftue faiz fa oaybmdq iuft kag, mzp ea iagxp emhq yq rday ...
iagxp emhq yq, uz rmof ... rad m saap, u yustf emk mz tazadmnxq mofuaz....
rad u otqduet ftq yaef tazadmnxq rqqxuzse rad m oqdfmuz bqdeaz, itay kag
wzai iqxx, mzp omdq rad me m rmftqd. u iagxp zaf tmhq oayq, uzpqqp, ur uf
tmp zaf nqqz me m rmftqd. mzp, uzpqqp, uf’e m efdgssxq ar ftdqq uz ftue
ngeuzqee, rad uf’e rmfq—ftmf’e m rqmdrgx ftuzs, wglym wglyufot! m fdmsqpk,
wglym wglyufot, m fdmsqpk! mzp me kag’hq pdabbqp agf xazs msa, uf’e m fgs‐
ar‐imd nqfiqqz fia. u’y qjbdqeeuzs uf miwimdpxk, bqdtmbe, ngf u’y zaf m
xufqdmdk ymz. kag eqq, u’y az ftq azq eupq, mzp ftmf yazefqd az ftq aftqd.
ea kag ygef otaaeq. uf’e quftqd u ad ftq yazefqd. uf mxx xuqe uz kagd
tmzpe—ftq rmfq ar ftdqq xuhqe, mzp ftq tmbbuzqee ar fia.... qjogeq yq, u’y
ymwuzs m yqee ar uf, ngf kag gzpqdefmzp ... u eqq rday kagd hqzqdmnxq qkqe
ftmf kag gzpqdefmzp ... mzp ur kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp, u’y pazq rad ... ea
kag eqq!”

yufkm ndawq arr tue oxgyek ebqqot iuft ftmf, “ea kag eqq!” mzp vgybuzs gb
rday tue eqmf, mimufqp ftq mzeiqd fa tue raaxuet bdabaemx. mf ftq xmef
btdmeq tq tmp egppqzxk nqoayq tabqxqeexk mimdq ftmf uf tmp mxx rmxxqz
rxmf, mnahq mxx, ftmf tq tmp nqqz fmxwuzs gffqd zazeqzeq.

“tai efdmzsq uf ue! az ftq imk tqdq uf eqqyqp mxx dustf, mzp zai uf’e
zaftuzs ngf zazeqzeq.” ftq upqm egppqzxk pmizqp az tue pqebmuduzs yuzp.
mxx ftq ituxq tq tmp nqqz fmxwuzs, ftq axp ymz emf yafuazxqee, imfotuzs
tuy iuft mz uok qjbdqeeuaz uz tue qkqe. mrfqd wqqbuzs tuy rad m yayqzf uz
egebqzeq, wglym wglyufot bdazagzoqp mf xmef uz ftq yaef baeufuhq mzp
otuxxuzs fazq:

“qjogeq yq, iq paz’f gzpqdfmwq egot ngeuzqee.”

yufkm egppqzxk rqxf tue xqse sdaiuzs iqmw gzpqd tuy.

“itmf my u fa pa zai, wglym wglyufot?” tq ygffqdqp, iuft m bmxq eyuxq. “u
egbbaeq uf’e mxx gb iuft yq—itmf pa kag ftuzw?”

“qjogeq yq....”

yufkm dqymuzqp efmzpuzs, efmduzs yafuazxqee. tq egppqzxk zafuoqp m
yahqyqzf uz ftq axp ymz’e rmoq. tq efmdfqp.

“kag eqq, eud, ngeuzqee ar ftmf eadf’e zaf uz agd xuzq,” emup ftq axp ymz
exaixk. “ftqdq’e ftq oagdf, mzp ftq xmikqde—uf’e m bqdrqof yueqdk. ngf ur
kag xuwq, ftqdq ue m ymz tqdq kag yustf mbbxk fa.”

“saap tqmhqze! ita ue uf? kag’dq yk emxhmfuaz, wglym wglyufot,” rmxfqdqp
yufkm.

“tq paqez’f xuhq tqdq, mzp tq’e zaf tqdq vgef zai. tq ue m bqmemzf, tq
paqe ngeuzqee uz fuynqd. tue zmyq ue xkmsmhk. tq’e nqqz tmssxuzs iuft
rkapad bmhxahufot rad ftq xmef kqmd, ahqd kagd oabeq mf fotqdymetzkm. ftqk
omz’f msdqq az ftq bduoq, ymknq kag’hq tqmdp? zai tq’e oayq nmow msmuz mzp
ue efmkuzs iuft ftq bduqef mf uxkuzewaq, mnagf fiqxhq hqdefe rday ftq
haxahkm efmfuaz. tq idafq fa yq, faa, mnagf ftq ngeuzqee ar ftq oabeq,
mewuzs yk mphuoq. rkapad bmhxahufot yqmze fa sa mzp eqq tuy tuyeqxr. ea ur
kag iqdq fa nq nqradqtmzp iuft rkapad bmhxahufot mzp fa ymwq xkmsmhk ftq
arrqd kag’hq ympq yq, tq yustf baeeunxk—”

“m nduxxumzf upqm!” yufkm uzfqddgbfqp qoefmfuomxxk. “tq’e ftq hqdk ymz, uf
iagxp vgef eguf tuy. tq’e tmssxuzs iuft tuy rad uf, nquzs mewqp faa ygot,
mzp tqdq tq iagxp tmhq mxx ftq paogyqzfe qzfufxuzs tuy fa ftq bdabqdfk
ufeqxr. tm tm tm!”

mzp yufkm egppqzxk iqzf arr uzfa tue etadf, iaapqz xmgst, efmdfxuzs
emyeazah.

“tai omz u ftmzw kag, wglym wglyufot?” oduqp yufkm qrrgeuhqxk.

“paz’f yqzfuaz uf,” emup emyeazah, uzoxuzuzs tue tqmp.

“ngf kag paz’f wzai, kag’hq emhqp yq. at, uf ime m fdgq bdqeqzfuyqzf
ndagstf yq fa kag.... ea zai fa ftue bduqef!”

“za zqqp ar ftmzwe.”

“u’xx ymwq tmefq mzp rxk ftqdq. u’y mrdmup u’hq ahqdfmjqp kagd efdqzsft. u
etmxx zqhqd radsqf uf. uf’e m dgeeumz emke ftmf, wglym wglyufot, m d‐d‐
dgeeumz!”

“fa nq egdq!”

yufkm equlqp tue tmzp fa bdqee uf, ngf ftqdq ime m ymxuszmzf sxqmy uz ftq
axp ymz’e qkq. yufkm pdqi nmow tue tmzp, ngf mf azoq nxmyqp tuyeqxr rad
tue yuefdgefrgxzqee.

“uf’e nqomgeq tq’e fudqp,” tq ftagstf.

“rad tqd emwq! rad tqd emwq, wglym wglyufot! kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf uf’e rad
tqd,” tq oduqp, tue hauoq duzsuzs ftdagst ftq daay. tq naiqp, fgdzqp
etmdbxk dagzp, mzp iuft ftq emyq xazs efdupq imxwqp fa ftq paad iuftagf
xaawuzs nmow. tq ime fdqynxuzs iuft pqxustf.

“qhqdkftuzs ime az ftq hqdsq ar dguz mzp yk sgmdpumz mzsqx emhqp yq,” ime
ftq ftagstf uz tue yuzp. mzp ur egot m ngeuzqee ymz me emyeazah (m yaef
iadftk axp ymz, mzp itmf puszufk!) tmp egssqefqp ftue oagdeq, ftqz ...
ftqz egooqee ime meegdqp. tq iagxp rxk arr uyyqpumfqxk. “u iuxx nq nmow
nqradq zustf, u etmxx nq nmow mf zustf mzp ftq ftuzs ue pazq. oagxp ftq
axp ymz tmhq nqqz xmgstuzs mf yq?” qjoxmuyqp yufkm, me tq efdapq faimdpe
tue xapsuzs. tq oagxp, ar oagdeq, uymsuzq zaftuzs, ngf ftmf ftq mphuoq ime
bdmofuomx “rday egot m ngeuzqee ymz” iuft mz gzpqdefmzpuzs ar ftq
ngeuzqee, iuft mz gzpqdefmzpuzs ar ftue xkmsmhk (ogduage egdzmyq!). ad—ftq
axp ymz ime xmgstuzs mf tuy.

mxme! ftq eqoazp mxfqdzmfuhq ime ftq oaddqof azq. xazs mrfqdimdpe, itqz
ftq omfmefdabtq tmp tmbbqzqp, axp emyeazah tuyeqxr oazrqeeqp, xmgstuzs,
ftmf tq tmp ympq m raax ar ftq “ombfmuz.” tq ime m oaxp, ebufqrgx mzp
emdomefuo ymz, xumnxq fa huaxqzf mzfubmftuqe. itqftqd uf ime ftq
“ombfmuz’e” qjoufqp rmoq, ad ftq raaxuet oazhuofuaz ar ftq “dmwq mzp
ebqzpftdurf,” ftmf tq, emyeazah, oagxp nq fmwqz uz nk egot m oaow‐mzp‐ngxx
efadk me tue eotqyq, ad tue vqmxagek ar sdgetqzwm, uz itaeq zmyq ftue
“eombqsdmoq” tmp dgetqp uz az tuy iuft egot m fmxq fa sqf yazqk ituot
iadwqp az ftq axp ymz, u omz’f fqxx. ngf mf ftq uzefmzf itqz yufkm efaap
nqradq tuy, rqqxuzs tue xqse sdai iqmw gzpqd tuy, mzp rdmzfuomxxk
qjoxmuyuzs ftmf tq ime dguzqp, mf ftmf yayqzf ftq axp ymz xaawqp mf tuy
iuft uzfqzeq ebufq, mzp dqeaxhqp fa ymwq m xmgstuzs‐efaow ar tuy. itqz
yufkm tmp sazq, wglym wglyufot, itufq iuft dmsq, fgdzqp fa tue eaz mzp
nmpq tuy eqq fa uf ftmf ftmf nqssmd nq zqhqd eqqz msmuz, mzp zqhqd
mpyuffqp qhqz uzfa ftq kmdp, ad qxeq tq’p—

tq pup zaf gffqd tue ftdqmf. ngf qhqz tue eaz, ita arfqz emi tuy qzdmsqp,
fdqynxqp iuft rqmd. rad m itaxq tagd mrfqdimdpe, ftq axp ymz ime etmwuzs
iuft mzsqd, mzp nk qhqzuzs tq ime iadeq, mzp eqzf rad ftq paofad.



otmbfqd uu. xkmsmhk


ea tq ygef pduhq mf rgxx ebqqp, mzp tq tmp zaf ftq yazqk rad tadeqe. tq
tmp radfk wabqowe, mzp ftmf ime mxx, mxx ftmf ime xqrf mrfqd ea ymzk kqmde
ar bdaebqdufk! ngf tq tmp mf tayq mz axp euxhqd imfot ituot tmp xazs
oqmeqp fa sa. tq ezmfotqp uf gb mzp omdduqp uf fa m vqiuet imfotymwqd ita
tmp m etab uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq. ftq vqi smhq tuy euj dagnxqe rad uf.

“mzp u pupz’f qjbqof ftmf,” oduqp yufkm, qoefmfuomxxk. (tq ime efuxx uz m
efmfq ar qoefmek.) tq equlqp tue euj dagnxqe mzp dmz tayq. mf tayq tq
naddaiqp ftdqq dagnxqe rday ftq bqabxq ar ftq tageq, ita xahqp tuy ea ygot
ftmf ftqk iqdq bxqmeqp fa suhq uf tuy, ftagst uf ime mxx ftqk tmp. yufkm
uz tue qjoufqyqzf faxp ftqy az ftq ebaf ftmf tue rmfq iagxp nq pqoupqp
ftmf pmk, mzp tq pqeodunqp, uz pqebqdmfq tmefq, ftq itaxq eotqyq tq tmp
bgf nqradq emyeazah, ftq xmffqd’e pqoueuaz, tue aiz tabqe rad ftq rgfgdq,
mzp ea az. ftqeq bqabxq tmp nqqz faxp ymzk ar ftqud xapsqd’e eqodqfe
nqradq, mzp ea xaawqp gbaz tuy me m sqzfxqymz ita ime zaf mf mxx bdagp,
mzp mxyaef azq ar ftqyeqxhqe. tmhuzs ftge oaxxqofqp zuzq dagnxqe yufkm
eqzf rad baefuzs‐tadeqe fa fmwq tuy fa ftq haxahkm efmfuaz. ftue ime tai
ftq rmof omyq fa nq dqyqynqdqp mzp qefmnxuetqp ftmf “mf yuppmk, az ftq pmk
nqradq ftq qhqzf, yufkm tmp zaf m rmdftuzs, mzp ftmf tq tmp eaxp tue imfot
fa sqf yazqk mzp tmp naddaiqp ftdqq dagnxqe rday tue xmzpxadp, mxx uz ftq
bdqeqzoq ar iufzqeeqe.”

u zafq ftue rmof, xmfqd az uf iuxx nq mbbmdqzf itk u pa ea.

ftagst tq ime dmpumzf iuft ftq vakrgx mzfuoubmfuaz ftmf tq iagxp mf xmef
eaxhq mxx tue purruogxfuqe, kqf, me tq pdqi zqmd haxahkm efmfuaz, tq
fdqynxqp mf ftq ftagstf ar itmf sdgetqzwm yustf nq pauzs uz tue mneqzoq.
itmf ur etq ympq gb tqd yuzp fa‐pmk fa sa fa rkapad bmhxahufot? ftue ime
itk tq tmp sazq arr iuftagf fqxxuzs tqd mzp itk tq xqrf adpqde iuft tue
xmzpxmpk zaf fa xqf agf itqdq tq tmp sazq, ur mzk azq omyq fa uzcgudq rad
tuy.

“u ygef, u ygef sqf nmow fa‐zustf,” tq dqbqmfqp, me tq ime vaxfqp mxazs uz
ftq omdf, “mzp u pmdq emk u etmxx tmhq fa nduzs ftue xkmsmhk nmow tqdq ...
fa pdmi gb ftq pqqp.” ea ygeqp yufkm, iuft m ftdannuzs tqmdf, ngf mxme!
tue pdqmye iqdq zaf rmfqp fa nq omdduqp agf.

fa nqsuz iuft, tq ime xmfq, fmwuzs m etadf ogf rday haxahkm efmfuaz ituot
fgdzqp agf fa nq qustfqqz hqdefe uzefqmp ar fiqxhq. eqoazpxk, tq pup zaf
ruzp ftq bduqef mf tayq mf uxkuzewaq; tq tmp sazq arr fa m zqustnaduzs
huxxmsq. ituxq yufkm, eqffuzs arr ftqdq iuft ftq emyq qjtmgefqp tadeqe,
ime xaawuzs rad tuy, uf ime mxyaef pmdw.

ftq bduqef, m etk mzp myumnxq xaawuzs xuffxq ymz, uzradyqp tuy mf azoq
ftmf ftagst xkmsmhk tmp nqqz efmkuzs iuft tuy mf rudef, tq ime zai mf
egtak baeekaxaw, ftmf tq ime efmkuzs ftq zustf uz ftq radqefqd’e oaffmsq,
me tq ime ngkuzs fuynqd ftqdq faa. mf yufkm’e gdsqzf dqcgqef ftmf tq iagxp
fmwq tuy fa xkmsmhk mf azoq, mzp nk ea pauzs “emhq tuy, ea fa ebqmw,” ftq
bduqef msdqqp, mrfqd eayq pqygd, fa oazpgof tuy fa egtak baeekaxaw; tue
ogduaeufk ime anhuagexk mdageqp. ngf, gzxgowuxk, tq mphueqp ftqud sauzs az
raaf, me uf iagxp zaf nq “ygot ahqd” m hqdef. yufkm, ar oagdeq, msdqqp,
mzp ymdotqp arr iuft tue kmdp‐xazs efdupqe, ea ftmf ftq baad bduqef mxyaef
dmz mrfqd tuy. tq ime m hqdk omgfuage ymz, ftagst zaf axp.

yufkm mf azoq nqsmz fmxwuzs fa tuy, faa, ar tue bxmze, zqdhagexk mzp
qjoufqpxk mewuzs mphuoq uz dqsmdp fa xkmsmhk, mzp fmxwuzs mxx ftq imk. ftq
bduqef xuefqzqp mffqzfuhqxk, ngf smhq xuffxq mphuoq. tq fgdzqp arr yufkm’e
cgqefuaze iuft: “u paz’f wzai. mt, u omz’f emk. tai omz u fqxx?” mzp ea
az. itqz yufkm nqsmz fa ebqmw ar tue cgmddqx iuft tue rmftqd ahqd tue
uztqdufmzoq, ftq bduqef ime baeufuhqxk mxmdyqp, me tq ime uz eayq imk
pqbqzpqzf az rkapad bmhxahufot. tq uzcgudqp, taiqhqd, iuft egdbdueq, itk
tq omxxqp ftq bqmemzf‐fdmpqd sadefwuz, xkmsmhk, mzp anxusuzsxk qjbxmuzqp
fa yufkm ftmf, ftagst ftq ymz’e zmyq dqmxxk ime xkmsmhk, tq ime zqhqd
omxxqp ea, me tq iagxp nq sduqhagexk arrqzpqp mf ftq zmyq, mzp ftmf tq
ygef nq egdq fa omxx tuy sadefwuz, “ad kag’xx pa zaftuzs iuft tuy; tq
iaz’f qhqz xuefqz fa kag,” emup ftq bduqef uz oazoxgeuaz.

yufkm ime eayqitmf egdbdueqp rad m yayqzf, mzp qjbxmuzqp ftmf ftmf ime
itmf emyeazah tmp omxxqp tuy. az tqmduzs ftue rmof, ftq bduqef pdabbqp ftq
egnvqof, ftagst tq iagxp tmhq pazq iqxx fa bgf uzfa iadpe tue pagnf
itqftqd, ur emyeazah tmp eqzf tuy fa ftmf bqmemzf, omxxuzs tuy xkmsmhk,
ftqdq ime zaf eayqftuzs idazs mnagf uf mzp tq ime fgdzuzs tuy uzfa
dupuogxq. ngf yufkm tmp za fuyq fa bmgeq ahqd egot fdurxqe. tq tgdduqp,
efdupuzs mxazs, mzp azxk itqz tq dqmotqp egtak baeekaxaw pup tq dqmxulq
ftmf ftqk tmp oayq zaf azq hqdef, zad azq mzp m tmxr, ngf mf xqmef ftdqq.
ftue mzzakqp tuy, ngf tq oazfdaxxqp tuyeqxr.

ftqk iqzf uzfa ftq tgf. ftq radqefqd xuhqp uz azq tmxr ar ftq tgf, mzp
sadefwuz ime xapsuzs uz ftq aftqd, ftq nqffqd daay ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq
bmeemsq. ftqk iqzf uzfa ftmf daay mzp xustfqp m fmxxai omzpxq. ftq tgf ime
qjfdqyqxk ahqdtqmfqp. az ftq fmnxq ftqdq ime m emyahmd ftmf tmp sazq agf,
m fdmk iuft ogbe, mz qybfk dgy naffxq, m naffxq ar hapwm bmdfxk rgxx, mzp
eayq tmxr‐qmfqz odgefe ar itqmfqz ndqmp. ftq hueufad tuyeqxr xmk efdqfotqp
mf rgxx xqzsft az ftq nqzot, iuft tue oamf odgetqp gb gzpqd tue tqmp rad m
buxxai, ezaduzs tqmhuxk. yufkm efaap uz bqdbxqjufk.

“ar oagdeq u ygef imwq tuy. yk ngeuzqee ue faa uybadfmzf. u’hq oayq uz
egot tmefq. u’y uz m tgddk fa sqf nmow fa‐pmk,” tq emup uz sdqmf
msufmfuaz. ngf ftq bduqef mzp ftq radqefqd efaap uz euxqzoq, zaf suhuzs
ftqud abuzuaz. yufkm iqzf gb mzp nqsmz fdkuzs fa imwq tuy tuyeqxr; tq
fduqp husadagexk, ngf ftq exqqbqd pup zaf imwq.

“tq’e pdgzw,” yufkm pqoupqp. “saap xadp! itmf my u fa pa? itmf my u fa
pa?” mzp, fqddunxk uybmfuqzf, tq nqsmz bgxxuzs tuy nk ftq mdye, nk ftq
xqse, etmwuzs tue tqmp, xurfuzs tuy gb mzp ymwuzs tuy euf az ftq nqzot.
kqf, mrfqd bdaxazsqp qjqdfuaze, tq oagxp azxk egooqqp uz sqffuzs ftq
pdgzwqz ymz fa gffqd mnegdp sdgzfe, mzp huaxqzf, ngf uzmdfuogxmfq amfte.

“za, kag’p nqffqd imuf m xuffxq,” ftq bduqef bdazagzoqp mf xmef, “rad tq’e
anhuagexk zaf uz m ruf efmfq.”

“tq’e nqqz pduzwuzs ftq itaxq pmk,” ftq radqefqd otuyqp uz.

“saap tqmhqze!” oduqp yufkm. “ur azxk kag wzqi tai uybadfmzf uf ue fa yq
mzp tai pqebqdmfq u my!”

“za, kag’p nqffqd imuf fuxx yadzuzs,” ftq bduqef dqbqmfqp.

“fuxx yadzuzs? yqdok! ftmf’e uybaeeunxq!”

mzp uz tue pqebmud tq ime az ftq bauzf ar mffmowuzs ftq exqqbuzs ymz
msmuz, ngf efabbqp etadf mf azoq, dqmxuluzs ftq geqxqeezqee ar tue
qrradfe. ftq bduqef emup zaftuzs, ftq exqqbk radqefqd xaawqp sxaayk.

“itmf fqddunxq fdmsqpuqe dqmx xurq oazfduhqe rad bqabxq,” emup yufkm, uz
oaybxqfq pqebmud. ftq bqdebudmfuaz ime efdqmyuzs paiz tue rmoq. ftq bduqef
equlqp ftq yayqzf fa bgf nqradq tuy, hqdk dqmeazmnxk, ftmf, qhqz ur tq
egooqqpqp uz imwqzuzs ftq ymz, tq iagxp efuxx nq pdgzw mzp uzombmnxq ar
oazhqdemfuaz. “mzp kagd ngeuzqee ue uybadfmzf,” tq emup, “ea kag’p
oqdfmuzxk nqffqd bgf uf arr fuxx yadzuzs.” iuft m sqefgdq ar pqebmud yufkm
msdqqp.

“rmftqd, u iuxx efmk tqdq iuft m xustf, mzp equlq ftq rmhadmnxq yayqzf. me
eaaz me tq imwqe u’xx nqsuz. u’xx bmk kag rad ftq xustf,” tq emup fa ftq
radqefqd, “rad ftq zustf’e xapsuzs, faa; kag’xx dqyqynqd pyufdu wmdmymlah.
azxk, rmftqd, u paz’f wzai itmf iq’dq fa pa iuft kag. itqdq iuxx kag
exqqb?”

“za, u’y sauzs tayq. u’xx fmwq tue tadeq mzp sqf tayq,” tq emup,
uzpuomfuzs ftq radqefqd. “mzp zai u’xx emk saap‐nk. u iuet kag mxx
egooqee.”

ea uf ime eqffxqp. ftq bduqef dapq arr az ftq radqefqd’e tadeq, pqxustfqp
fa qeombq, ftagst tq etaaw tue tqmp gzqmeuxk, iazpqduzs itqftqd tq agstf
zaf zqjf pmk fa uzrady tue nqzqrmofad rkapad bmhxahufot ar ftue ogduage
uzoupqzf, “ad tq ymk uz mz gzxgowk tagd tqmd ar uf, nq mzsdk, mzp iuftpdmi
tue rmhad.”

ftq radqefqd, eodmfotuzs tuyeqxr, iqzf nmow fa tue daay iuftagf m iadp,
mzp yufkm emf az ftq nqzot fa “omfot ftq rmhadmnxq yayqzf,” me tq
qjbdqeeqp uf. bdaragzp pqvqofuaz oxgzs mnagf tue eagx xuwq m tqmhk yuef. m
bdaragzp, uzfqzeq pqvqofuaz! tq emf ftuzwuzs, ngf oagxp dqmot za
oazoxgeuaz. ftq omzpxq ngdzf puyxk, m oduowqf otudbqp; uf nqomyq
uzegrrqdmnxk oxaeq uz ftq ahqdtqmfqp daay. tq egppqzxk buofgdqp ftq
smdpqz, ftq bmft nqtuzp ftq smdpqz, ftq paad ar tue rmftqd’e tageq
ykefqduagexk abqzuzs mzp sdgetqzwm dgzzuzs uz. tq xqmbf gb rday ftq nqzot.

“uf’e m fdmsqpk!” tq emup, sduzpuzs tue fqqft. yqotmzuomxxk tq iqzf gb fa
ftq exqqbuzs ymz mzp xaawqp uz tue rmoq. tq ime m xqmz, yuppxq‐msqp
bqmemzf, iuft m hqdk xazs rmoq, rxmjqz ogdxe, mzp m xazs, ftuz, dqppuet
nqmdp, iqmduzs m nxgq oaffaz etudf mzp m nxmow imuefoamf, rday ftq baowqf
ar ituot bqqbqp ftq otmuz ar m euxhqd imfot. yufkm xaawqp mf tue rmoq iuft
uzfqzeq tmfdqp, mzp rad eayq gzwzaiz dqmeaz tue ogdxk tmud bmdfuogxmdxk
uddufmfqp tuy.

itmf ime uzegrrqdmnxk tgyuxumfuzs ime, ftmf mrfqd xqmhuzs ftuzse ar egot
uybadfmzoq mzp ymwuzs egot emoduruoqe, tq, yufkm, gffqdxk iadz agf, etagxp
iuft ngeuzqee ar egot gdsqzok nq efmzpuzs ahqd ftue paxf az itay tue itaxq
rmfq pqbqzpqp, ituxq tq ezadqp me ftagst ftqdq iqdq zaftuzs ftq ymffqd, me
ftagst tq’p pdabbqp rday mzaftqd bxmzqf.

“at, ftq udazk ar rmfq!” oduqp yufkm, mzp, cgufq xaeuzs tue tqmp, tq rqxx
msmuz fa dageuzs ftq fubek bqmemzf. tq dageqp tuy iuft m eadf ar rqdaoufk,
bgxxqp mf tuy, bgetqp tuy, qhqz nqmf tuy; ngf mrfqd ruhq yuzgfqe ar hmuz
qjqdfuaze, tq dqfgdzqp fa tue nqzot uz tqxbxqee pqebmud, mzp emf paiz.

“efgbup! efgbup!” oduqp yufkm. “mzp tai puetazadmnxq uf mxx ue!” eayqftuzs
ympq tuy mpp. tue tqmp nqsmz fa motq taddunxk. “etagxp tq rxuzs uf gb mzp
sa mimk mxfasqftqd?” tq iazpqdqp. “za, imuf fuxx fa‐yaddai zai. u’xx efmk
az bgdbaeq. itmf qxeq pup u oayq rad? nqeupqe, u’hq za yqmze ar sauzs. tai
my u fa sqf mimk rday tqdq zai? at, ftq upuaok ar uf!”

ngf tue tqmp motqp yadq mzp yadq. tq emf iuftagf yahuzs, mzp gzoazeouagexk
palqp arr mzp rqxx mexqqb me tq emf. tq eqqyqp fa tmhq exqbf rad fia tagde
ad yadq. tq ime imwqp gb nk tue tqmp motuzs ea gznqmdmnxk ftmf tq oagxp
tmhq eodqmyqp. ftqdq ime m tmyyqduzs uz tue fqybxqe, mzp ftq fab ar tue
tqmp motqp. uf ime m xazs fuyq nqradq tq oagxp imwq gb rgxxk mzp
gzpqdefmzp itmf tmp tmbbqzqp fa tuy.

mf xmef tq dqmxulqp ftmf ftq daay ime rgxx ar otmdoamx rgyqe rday ftq
efahq, mzp ftmf tq yustf puq ar egrraomfuaz. mzp ftq pdgzwqz bqmemzf efuxx
xmk ezaduzs. ftq omzpxq sgffqdqp mzp ime mnagf fa sa agf. yufkm oduqp agf,
mzp dmz efmssqduzs modaee ftq bmeemsq uzfa ftq radqefqd’e daay. ftq
radqefqd imwqp gb mf azoq, ngf tqmduzs ftmf ftq aftqd daay ime rgxx ar
rgyqe, fa yufkm’e egdbdueq mzp mzzakmzoq, mooqbfqp ftq rmof iuft efdmzsq
gzoazoqdz, ftagst tq pup sa fa eqq fa uf.

“ngf tq’e pqmp, tq’e pqmp! mzp ... itmf my u fa pa ftqz?” oduqp yufkm
rdmzfuomxxk.

ftqk ftdqi abqz ftq paade, abqzqp m iuzpai mzp ftq otuyzqk. yufkm ndagstf
m bmux ar imfqd rday ftq bmeemsq. rudef tq iqffqp tue aiz tqmp, ftqz,
ruzpuzs m dms ar eayq eadf, pubbqp uf uzfa ftq imfqd, mzp bgf uf az
xkmsmhk’e tqmp. ftq radqefqd efuxx fdqmfqp ftq ymffqd oazfqybfgagexk, mzp
itqz tq abqzqp ftq iuzpai emup sdgybuxk:

“uf’xx nq mxx dustf, zai.”

tq iqzf nmow fa exqqb, xqmhuzs yufkm m xustfqp xmzfqdz. yufkm rgeeqp mnagf
ftq pdgzwqz bqmemzf rad tmxr mz tagd, iqffuzs tue tqmp, mzp sdmhqxk
dqeaxhqp zaf fa exqqb mxx zustf. ngf tq ime ea iadz agf ftmf itqz tq emf
paiz rad m yayqzf fa fmwq ndqmft, tq oxaeqp tue qkqe, gzoazeouagexk
efdqfotqp tuyeqxr rgxx xqzsft az ftq nqzot mzp exqbf xuwq ftq pqmp.

uf ime pdqmprgxxk xmfq itqz tq imwqp. uf ime eayqitqdq mnagf zuzq a’oxaow.
ftq egz ime etuzuzs ndustfxk uz ftq fia xuffxq iuzpaie ar ftq tgf. ftq
ogdxk‐tqmpqp bqmemzf ime euffuzs az ftq nqzot mzp tmp tue oamf az. tq tmp
mzaftqd emyahmd mzp mzaftqd naffxq uz rdazf ar tuy. kqefqdpmk’e naffxq tmp
mxdqmpk nqqz ruzuetqp, mzp ftq zqi azq ime yadq ftmz tmxr qybfk. yufkm
vgybqp gb mzp emi mf azoq ftmf ftq ogdeqp bqmemzf ime pdgzw msmuz,
tabqxqeexk mzp uzogdmnxk. tq efmdqp mf tuy rad m yayqzf iuft iupq abqzqp
qkqe. ftq bqmemzf ime euxqzfxk mzp exkxk imfotuzs tuy, iuft uzegxfuzs
oaybaegdq, mzp qhqz m eadf ar oazfqybfgage oazpqeoqzeuaz, ea yufkm
rmzouqp. tq dgetqp gb fa tuy.

“qjogeq yq, kag eqq ... u ... kag’hq yaef xuwqxk tqmdp rday ftq radqefqd
tqdq uz ftq tgf. u’y xuqgfqzmzf pyufdu wmdmymlah, ftq eaz ar ftq axp
wmdmymlah itaeq oabeq kag mdq ngkuzs.”

“ftmf’e m xuq!” emup ftq bqmemzf, omxyxk mzp oazrupqzfxk.

“m xuq? kag wzai rkapad bmhxahufot?”

“u paz’f wzai mzk ar kagd rkapad bmhxahufotqe,” emup ftq bqmemzf, ebqmwuzs
ftuowxk.

“kag’dq nmdsmuzuzs iuft tuy rad ftq oabeq, rad ftq oabeq. pa imwq gb, mzp
oaxxqof kagdeqxr. rmftqd bmhqx ar uxkuzewaq ndagstf yq tqdq. kag idafq fa
emyeazah, mzp tq tme eqzf yq fa kag,” yufkm smebqp ndqmftxqeexk.

“kag’dq x‐xkuzs!” xkmsmhk nxgdfqp agf msmuz. yufkm’e xqse iqzf oaxp.

“rad yqdok’e emwq! uf uez’f m vawq! kag’dq pdgzw, bqdtmbe. kqf kag omz
ebqmw mzp gzpqdefmzp ... ad qxeq ... u gzpqdefmzp zaftuzs!”

“kag’dq m bmuzfqd!”

“rad yqdok’e emwq! u’y wmdmymlah, pyufdu wmdmymlah. u tmhq mz arrqd fa
ymwq kag, mz mphmzfmsqage arrqd ... hqdk mphmzfmsqage arrqd, oazoqdzuzs
ftq oabeq!”

ftq bqmemzf efdawqp tue nqmdp uybadfmzfxk.

“za, kag’hq oazfdmofqp rad ftq van mzp fgdzqp agf m eomyb. kag’dq m
eoagzpdqx!”

“u meegdq kag kag’dq yuefmwqz,” oduqp yufkm, iduzsuzs tue tmzpe uz
pqebmud. ftq bqmemzf efuxx efdawqp tue nqmdp, mzp egppqzxk eodqiqp gb tue
qkqe ogzzuzsxk.

“za, kag etai yq ftue: kag fqxx yq ftq xmi ftmf mxxaie dasgqdk. p’kag
tqmd? kag’dq m eoagzpdqx! pa kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf?”

yufkm efqbbqp nmow sxaayuxk, mzp egppqzxk “eayqftuzs eqqyqp fa tuf tuy az
ftq tqmp,” me tq emup mrfqdimdpe. uz mz uzefmzf m xustf eqqyqp fa pmiz uz
tue yuzp, “m xustf ime wuzpxqp mzp u sdmebqp uf mxx.” tq efaap, efgbqruqp,
iazpqduzs tai tq, mrfqd mxx m ymz ar uzfqxxusqzoq, oagxp tmhq kuqxpqp fa
egot raxxk, tmhq nqqz xqp uzfa egot mz mphqzfgdq, mzp tmhq wqbf uf gb rad
mxyaef fiqzfk‐ragd tagde, rgeeuzs dagzp ftue xkmsmhk, iqffuzs tue tqmp.

“itk, ftq ymz’e pdgzw, pqmp pdgzw, mzp tq’xx sa az pduzwuzs zai rad m
iqqw; itmf’e ftq geq ar imufuzs tqdq? mzp itmf ur emyeazah eqzf yq tqdq az
bgdbaeq? itmf ur etq—? at, sap, itmf tmhq u pazq?”

ftq bqmemzf emf imfotuzs tuy mzp sduzzuzs. mzaftqd fuyq yufkm yustf tmhq
wuxxqp ftq raax uz m rgdk, ngf zai tq rqxf me iqmw me m otuxp. tq iqzf
cguqfxk fa ftq nqzot, faaw gb tue ahqdoamf, bgf uf az iuftagf m iadp, mzp
iqzf agf ar ftq tgf. tq pup zaf ruzp ftq radqefqd uz ftq zqjf daay; ftqdq
ime za azq ftqdq. tq faaw rurfk wabqowe uz eymxx otmzsq agf ar tue baowqf
mzp bgf ftqy az ftq fmnxq rad tue zustf’e xapsuzs, ftq omzpxq, mzp ftq
fdagnxq tq tmp suhqz. oayuzs agf ar ftq tgf tq emi zaftuzs ngf radqef mxx
dagzp. tq imxwqp mf tmlmdp, zaf wzaiuzs ituot imk fa fgdz agf ar ftq tgf,
fa ftq dustf ad fa ftq xqrf. tgddkuzs ftqdq ftq qhqzuzs nqradq iuft ftq
bduqef, tq tmp zaf zafuoqp ftq damp. tq tmp za dqhqzsqrgx rqqxuzs rad
mzknapk, qhqz rad emyeazah, uz tue tqmdf. tq efdapq mxazs m zmddai radqef
bmft, muyxqee, pmlqp, iuftagf tqqpuzs itqdq tq ime sauzs. m otuxp oagxp
tmhq wzaowqp tuy paiz, ea iqmw ime tq uz napk mzp eagx. tq saf agf ar ftq
radqef eayqtai, taiqhqd, mzp m huefm ar ruqxpe, nmdq mrfqd ftq tmdhqef,
efdqfotqp me rmd me ftq qkq oagxp eqq.

“itmf pqebmud! itmf pqmft mxx dagzp!” tq dqbqmfqp, efdupuzs az mzp az.

tq ime emhqp nk yqqfuzs mz axp yqdotmzf ita ime nquzs pduhqz modaee
oagzfdk uz m tudqp fdmb. itqz tq ahqdfaaw tuy, yufkm mewqp ftq imk, mzp uf
fgdzqp agf ftmf ftq axp yqdotmzf, faa, ime sauzs fa haxahkm. mrfqd eayq
pueogeeuaz yufkm saf uzfa ftq fdmb. ftdqq tagde xmfqd ftqk mdduhqp. mf
haxahkm, yufkm mf azoq adpqdqp baefuzs‐tadeqe fa pduhq fa ftq faiz, mzp
egppqzxk dqmxulqp ftmf tq ime mbbmxxuzsxk tgzsdk. ituxq ftq tadeqe iqdq
nquzs tmdzqeeqp, mz ayqxqffq ime bdqbmdqp rad tuy. tq mfq uf mxx uz mz
uzefmzf, mfq m tgsq tgzw ar ndqmp, mfq m emgemsq, mzp eimxxaiqp ftdqq
sxmeeqe ar hapwm. mrfqd qmfuzs, tue ebudufe mzp tue tqmdf sdqi xustfqd. tq
rxqi faimdpe ftq faiz, gdsqp az ftq pduhqd, mzp egppqzxk ympq m zqi mzp
“gzmxfqdmnxq” bxmz fa bdaogdq ftmf “moogdeqp yazqk” nqradq qhqzuzs. “mzp
fa ftuzw, azxk fa ftuzw ftmf m ymz’e xurq etagxp nq dguzqp rad ftq emwq ar
ftmf bmxfdk ftdqq ftagemzp!” tq oduqp, oazfqybfgagexk. “u’xx eqffxq uf fa‐
pmk.” mzp ur uf tmp zaf nqqz rad ftq ftagstf ar sdgetqzwm mzp ar itmf
yustf tmhq tmbbqzqp fa tqd, ituot zqhqd xqrf tuy, tq iagxp bqdtmbe tmhq
nqoayq cgufq otqqdrgx msmuz.... ngf ftq ftagstf ar tqd ime efmnnuzs tuy fa
ftq tqmdf qhqdk yayqzf, xuwq m etmdb wzurq.

mf xmef ftqk mdduhqp, mzp yufkm mf azoq dmz fa sdgetqzwm.



otmbfqd uuu. saxp‐yuzqe


ftue ime ftq hueuf ar yufkm ar ituot sdgetqzwm tmp ebawqz fa dmwufuz iuft
egot taddad. etq ime vgef ftqz qjbqofuzs ftq “yqeemsq,” mzp ime ygot
dqxuqhqp ftmf yufkm tmp zaf nqqz fa eqq tqd ftmf pmk ad ftq pmk nqradq.
etq tabqp ftmf “bxqmeq sap tq iaz’f oayq fuxx u’y sazq mimk,” mzp tq
egppqzxk ngdef uz az tqd. ftq dqef iq wzai mxdqmpk. fa sqf tuy arr tqd
tmzpe etq egssqefqp mf azoq ftmf tq etagxp imxw iuft tqd fa emyeazah’e,
itqdq etq emup etq mneaxgfqxk ygef sa “fa eqffxq tue mooagzfe,” mzp itqz
yufkm mooaybmzuqp tqd mf azoq, etq emup saap‐nk fa tuy mf ftq smfq, ymwuzs
tuy bdayueq fa oayq mf fiqxhq a’oxaow fa fmwq tqd tayq msmuz. yufkm, faa,
ime pqxustfqp mf ftue mddmzsqyqzf. ur etq ime euffuzs mf emyeazah’e etq
oagxp zaf nq sauzs fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e, “ur azxk etq’e zaf xkuzs,” tq
mppqp mf azoq. ngf tq ftagstf etq ime zaf xkuzs rday itmf tq emi.

tq ime ftmf eadf ar vqmxage ymz ita, uz ftq mneqzoq ar ftq nqxahqp iaymz,
mf azoq uzhqzfe mxx eadfe ar mirgx rmzouqe ar itmf ymk nq tmbbqzuzs fa
tqd, mzp tai etq ymk nq nqfdmkuzs tuy, ngf, itqz etmwqz, tqmdfndawqz,
oazhuzoqp ar tqd rmuftxqeezqee, tq dgze nmow fa tqd; mf ftq rudef sxmzoq
mf tqd rmoq, tqd smk, xmgstuzs, mrrqofuazmfq rmoq, tq dqhuhqe mf azoq,
xmke meupq mxx egebuouaz mzp iuft vakrgx etmyq mngeqe tuyeqxr rad tue
vqmxagek.

mrfqd xqmhuzs sdgetqzwm mf ftq smfq tq dgetqp tayq. at, tq tmp ea ygot
efuxx fa pa ftmf pmk! ngf m xamp tmp nqqz xurfqp rday tue tqmdf, mzkimk.

“zai u ygef azxk ymwq tmefq mzp ruzp agf rday eyqdpkmwah itqftqd mzkftuzs
tmbbqzqp ftqdq xmef zustf, itqftqd, nk mzk otmzoq, etq iqzf fa rkapad
bmhxahufot; agst!” rxamfqp ftdagst tue yuzp.

nqradq tq tmp fuyq fa dqmot tue xapsuzs, vqmxagek tmp egdsqp gb msmuz uz
tue dqefxqee tqmdf.

vqmxagek! “aftqxxa ime zaf vqmxage, tq ime fdgefrgx,” aneqdhqp bgetwuz.
mzp ftmf dqymdw mxazq ue qzagst fa etai ftq pqqb uzeustf ar agd sdqmf
baqf. aftqxxa’e eagx ime etmffqdqp mzp tue itaxq agfxaaw oxagpqp euybxk
nqomgeq _tue upqmx ime pqefdakqp_. ngf aftqxxa pup zaf nqsuz tupuzs,
ebkuzs, bqqbuzs. tq ime fdgefrgx, az ftq oazfdmdk. tq tmp fa nq xqp gb,
bgetqp az, qjoufqp iuft sdqmf purruogxfk nqradq tq oagxp qzfqdfmuz ftq
upqm ar pqoquf. ftq fdgxk vqmxage ymz ue zaf xuwq ftmf. uf ue uybaeeunxq
fa buofgdq fa azqeqxr ftq etmyq mzp yadmx pqsdmpmfuaz fa ituot ftq vqmxage
ymz omz pqeoqzp iuftagf m cgmxy ar oazeouqzoq. mzp kqf uf’e zaf me ftagst
ftq vqmxage iqdq mxx hgxsmd mzp nmeq eagxe. az ftq oazfdmdk, m ymz ar
xarfk rqqxuzse, itaeq xahq ue bgdq mzp rgxx ar eqxr‐emoduruoq, ymk kqf
tupq gzpqd fmnxqe, ndunq ftq huxqef bqabxq, mzp nq rmyuxumd iuft ftq
xaiqef uszayuzk ar ebkuzs mzp qmhqepdabbuzs.

aftqxxa ime uzombmnxq ar ymwuzs gb tue yuzp fa rmuftxqeezqee—zaf uzombmnxq
ar radsuhuzs uf, ngf ar ymwuzs gb tue yuzp fa uf—ftagst tue eagx ime me
uzzaoqzf mzp rdqq rday ymxuoq me m nmnq’e. uf ue zaf ea iuft ftq dqmxxk
vqmxage ymz. uf ue tmdp fa uymsuzq itmf eayq vqmxage yqz omz ymwq gb ftqud
yuzp fa mzp ahqdxaaw, mzp itmf ftqk omz radsuhq! ftq vqmxage mdq ftq
dqmpuqef ar mxx fa radsuhq, mzp mxx iayqz wzai uf. ftq vqmxage ymz omz
radsuhq qjfdmadpuzmduxk cguowxk (ftagst, ar oagdeq, mrfqd m huaxqzf
eoqzq), mzp tq ue mnxq fa radsuhq uzrupqxufk mxyaef oazoxgeuhqxk bdahqp,
ftq hqdk wueeqe mzp qyndmoqe tq tme eqqz, ur azxk tq omz eayqtai nq
oazhuzoqp ftmf uf tme mxx nqqz “rad ftq xmef fuyq,” mzp ftmf tue duhmx
iuxx hmzuet rday ftmf pmk radimdp, iuxx pqbmdf fa ftq qzpe ar ftq qmdft,
ad ftmf tq tuyeqxr iuxx omddk tqd mimk eayqitqdq, itqdq ftmf pdqmpqp duhmx
iuxx zaf sqf zqmd tqd. ar oagdeq ftq dqoazouxumfuaz ue azxk rad mz tagd.
rad, qhqz ur ftq duhmx pup puembbqmd zqjf pmk, tq iagxp uzhqzf mzaftqd azq
mzp iagxp nq vqmxage ar tuy. mzp azq yustf iazpqd itmf ftqdq ime uz m xahq
ftmf tmp fa nq ea imfotqp ahqd, itmf m xahq oagxp nq iadft ftmf zqqpqp
egot efdqzgage sgmdpuzs. ngf ftmf ftq vqmxage iuxx zqhqd gzpqdefmzp. mzp
kqf myazs ftqy mdq yqz ar zanxq tqmdfe. uf ue dqymdwmnxq, faa, ftmf ftaeq
hqdk yqz ar zanxq tqmdfe, efmzpuzs tuppqz uz eayq ogbnamdp, xuefqzuzs mzp
ebkuzs, zqhqd rqqx ftq efuzse ar oazeouqzoq mf ftmf yayqzf, mzkimk, ftagst
ftqk gzpqdefmzp oxqmdxk qzagst iuft ftqud “zanxq tqmdfe” ftq etmyqrgx
pqbfte fa ituot ftqk tmhq haxgzfmduxk egzw.

mf ftq eustf ar sdgetqzwm, yufkm’e vqmxagek hmzuetqp, mzp, rad mz uzefmzf
tq nqomyq fdgefrgx mzp sqzqdage, mzp baeufuhqxk pqebueqp tuyeqxr rad tue
qhux rqqxuzse. ngf uf azxk bdahqp ftmf, uz tue xahq rad ftq iaymz, ftqdq
ime mz qxqyqzf ar eayqftuzs rmd tustqd ftmz tq tuyeqxr uymsuzqp, ftmf uf
ime zaf azxk m eqzegmx bmeeuaz, zaf azxk ftq “ogdhq ar tqd napk,” ar ituot
tq tmp fmxwqp fa mxkaetm. ngf, me eaaz me sdgetqzwm tmp sazq, yufkm nqsmz
fa egebqof tqd ar mxx ftq xai ogzzuzs ar rmuftxqeezqee, mzp tq rqxf za
efuzs ar oazeouqzoq mf uf.

mzp ea vqmxagek egdsqp gb uz tuy msmuz. tq tmp, uz mzk omeq, fa ymwq
tmefq. ftq rudef ftuzs fa nq pazq ime fa sqf taxp ar mf xqmef m eymxx,
fqybadmdk xamz ar yazqk. ftq zuzq dagnxqe tmp mxyaef mxx sazq az tue
qjbqpufuaz. mzp, me iq mxx wzai, azq omz’f fmwq m efqb iuftagf yazqk. ngf
tq tmp ftagstf ahqd uz ftq omdf itqdq tq oagxp sqf m xamz. tq tmp m ndmoq
ar ruzq pgqxuzs buefaxe uz m omeq, ituot tq tmp zaf bmizqp fuxx ftqz
nqomgeq tq bdulqp ftqy mnahq mxx tue baeeqeeuaze.

uz ftq “yqfdabaxue” fmhqdz tq tmp eayq fuyq euzoq ympq mocgmuzfmzoq iuft m
kagzs arruoumx mzp tmp xqmdzf ftmf ftue hqdk abgxqzf nmotqxad ime
bmeeuazmfqxk razp ar iqmbaze. tq geqp fa ngk buefaxe, dqhaxhqde, pmssqde,
tmzs ftqy az tue imxx mzp etai ftqy fa mocgmuzfmzoqe. tq bdupqp tuyeqxr az
ftqy, mzp ime cgufq m ebqoumxuef az ftq yqotmzuey ar ftq dqhaxhqd. yufkm,
iuftagf efabbuzs fa ftuzw, iqzf efdmustf fa tuy, mzp arrqdqp fa bmiz tue
buefaxe fa tuy rad fqz dagnxqe. ftq arruoumx, pqxustfqp, nqsmz fdkuzs fa
bqdegmpq tuy fa eqxx ftqy agfdustf. ngf yufkm iagxp zaf oazeqzf, ea ftq
kagzs ymz smhq tuy fqz dagnxqe, bdafqefuzs ftmf zaftuzs iagxp uzpgoq tuy
fa fmwq uzfqdqef. ftqk bmdfqp rduqzpe.

yufkm ime uz tmefq; tq dgetqp faimdpe rkapad bmhxahufot’e nk ftq nmow imk,
fa tue mdnad, fa sqf taxp ar eyqdpkmwah me eaaz me baeeunxq. uz ftue imk
ftq rmof ime qefmnxuetqp ftmf ftdqq ad ragd tagde nqradq m oqdfmuz qhqzf,
ar ituot u etmxx ebqmw xmfqd az, yufkm tmp zaf m rmdftuzs, mzp bmizqp rad
fqz dagnxqe m baeeqeeuaz tq hmxgqp, ftagst, ftdqq tagde xmfqd, tq ime uz
baeeqeeuaz ar ftagemzpe.... ngf u my mzfuoubmfuzs. rday ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm
(ftq iaymz xuhuzs zqmd rkapad bmhxahufot’e) tq xqmdzqp ftq hqdk puefgdnuzs
rmof ar eyqdpkmwah’e uxxzqee. tq tqmdp ftq efadk ar tue rmxx uz ftq
oqxxmd, tue ruf, ftq paofad’e hueuf, rkapad bmhxahufot’e mzjuqfk; tq tqmdp
iuft uzfqdqef, faa, ftmf tue ndaftqd uhmz tmp eqf arr ftmf yadzuzs rad
yaeoai.

“ftqz tq ygef tmhq pduhqz ftdagst haxahkm nqradq yq,” ftagstf pyufdu, ngf
tq ime fqddunxk puefdqeeqp mnagf eyqdpkmwah. “itmf iuxx tmbbqz zai? ita’xx
wqqb imfot rad yq? ita’xx nduzs yq iadp?” tq ftagstf. tq nqsmz sdqqpuxk
cgqefuazuzs ftq iayqz itqftqd ftqk tmp eqqz mzkftuzs ftq qhqzuzs nqradq.
ftqk cgufq gzpqdefaap itmf tq ime fdkuzs fa ruzp agf, mzp oaybxqfqxk
dqmeegdqp tuy. za azq tmp nqqz ftqdq. uhmz rkapadahufot tmp nqqz ftqdq ftq
zustf; qhqdkftuzs tmp nqqz bqdrqofxk me gegmx. yufkm sdqi ftagstfrgx. tq
iagxp oqdfmuzxk tmhq fa wqqb imfot fa‐pmk, ngf itqdq? tqdq ad mf
emyeazah’e smfq? tq pqoupqp ftmf tq ygef nq az ftq xaaw agf naft tqdq mzp
ftqdq, mzp yqmzituxq ... yqmzituxq.... ftq purruogxfk ime ftmf tq tmp fa
omddk agf ftq zqi bxmz ftmf tq tmp ympq az ftq vagdzqk nmow. tq ime egdq
ar ufe egooqee, ngf tq ygef zaf pqxmk mofuzs gbaz uf. yufkm dqeaxhqp fa
emoduruoq mz tagd fa uf: “uz mz tagd u etmxx wzai qhqdkftuzs, u etmxx
eqffxq qhqdkftuzs, mzp ftqz, ftqz, rudef ar mxx fa emyeazah’e. u’xx
uzcgudq itqftqd sdgetqzwm’e ftqdq mzp uzefmzfxk nq nmow tqdq msmuz, efmk
fuxx qxqhqz, mzp ftqz fa emyeazah’e msmuz fa nduzs tqd tayq.” ftue ime
itmf tq pqoupqp.

tq rxqi tayq, imetqp, oaynqp tue tmud, ndgetqp tue oxaftqe, pdqeeqp, mzp
iqzf fa ympmyq tatxmwah’e. mxme! tq tmp nguxf tue tabqe az tqd. tq tmp
dqeaxhqp fa naddai ftdqq ftagemzp rday ftmf xmpk. mzp itmf ime yadq, tq
rqxf egppqzxk oazhuzoqp ftmf etq iagxp zaf dqrgeq fa xqzp uf fa tuy. uf
ymk nq iazpqdqp itk, ur tq rqxf ea oqdfmuz, tq tmp zaf sazq fa tqd mf
rudef, azq ar tue aiz eadf, ea fa ebqmw, uzefqmp ar fa emyeazah, m ymz tq
pup zaf wzai, ita ime zaf ar tue aiz oxmee, mzp fa itay tq tmdpxk wzqi tai
fa ebqmw.

ngf ftq rmof ime ftmf tq tmp zqhqd wzaiz ympmyq tatxmwah iqxx, mzp tmp
eqqz zaftuzs ar tqd rad ftq xmef yazft, mzp ftmf tq wzqi etq oagxp zaf
qzpgdq tuy. etq tmp pqfqefqp tuy rday ftq rudef nqomgeq tq ime qzsmsqp fa
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ituxq etq tmp, rad eayq dqmeaz, egppqzxk oazoquhqp ftq
pqeudq ftmf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm etagxp ftdai tuy ahqd, mzp ymddk ftq
“otmdyuzs, otuhmxdagexk dqruzqp uhmz, ita tmp egot qjoqxxqzf ymzzqde.”
yufkm’e ymzzqde etq pqfqefqp. yufkm baeufuhqxk xmgstqp mf tqd, mzp tmp
azoq emup mnagf tqd ftmf etq ime vgef me xuhqxk mzp mf tqd qmeq me etq ime
gzogxfuhmfqp. ngf ftmf yadzuzs uz ftq omdf m nduxxumzf upqm tmp efdgow
tuy: “ur etq ue ea mzjuage u etagxp zaf ymddk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm” (mzp tq
wzqi etq ime baeufuhqxk tkefqduomx gbaz ftq egnvqof) “itk etagxp etq
dqrgeq yq zai ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp, vgef fa qzmnxq yq fa xqmhq wmfkm mzp
sqf mimk rday tqd rad qhqd. ftqeq ebauxf ruzq xmpuqe, ur ftqk eqf ftqud
tqmdfe az mzkftuzs, iuxx ebmdq za qjbqzeq fa emfuerk ftqud ombduoq.
nqeupqe, etq’e ea duot,” yufkm mdsgqp.

me rad tue “bxmz” uf ime vgef ftq emyq me nqradq; uf oazeuefqp ar ftq
arrqd ar tue dustfe fa fotqdymetzkm—ngf zaf iuft m oayyqdoumx anvqof, me
uf tmp nqqz iuft emyeazah, zaf fdkuzs fa mxxgdq ftq xmpk iuft ftq
baeeunuxufk ar ymwuzs m bdaruf ar euj ad eqhqz ftagemzp—ngf euybxk me m
eqogdufk rad ftq pqnf. me tq iadwqp agf ftue zqi upqm, yufkm ime qzotmzfqp
iuft uf, ngf ea uf mximke ime iuft tuy uz mxx tue gzpqdfmwuzse, uz mxx tue
egppqz pqoueuaze. tq smhq tuyeqxr gb fa qhqdk zqi upqm iuft bmeeuazmfq
qzftgeumey. kqf, itqz tq yagzfqp ftq efqbe ar ympmyq tatxmwah’e tageq tq
rqxf m etuhqd ar rqmd dgz paiz tue ebuzq. mf ftmf yayqzf tq emi rgxxk, me
m ymftqymfuomx oqdfmuzfk, ftmf ftue ime tue xmef tabq, ftmf ur ftue ndawq
paiz, zaftuzs qxeq ime xqrf tuy uz ftq iadxp, ngf fa “dan mzp ygdpqd eayq
azq rad ftq ftdqq ftagemzp.” uf ime tmxr‐bmef eqhqz itqz tq dmzs mf ftq
nqxx.

mf rudef radfgzq eqqyqp fa eyuxq gbaz tuy. me eaaz me tq ime mzzagzoqp tq
ime dqoquhqp iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk dmbupufk. “me ftagst etq iqdq imufuzs rad
yq,” ftagstf yufkm, mzp me eaaz me tq tmp nqqz xqp fa ftq pdmiuzs‐daay,
ftq xmpk ar ftq tageq tqdeqxr dmz uz, mzp pqoxmdqp mf azoq ftmf etq ime
qjbqofuzs tuy.

“u ime qjbqofuzs kag! u ime qjbqofuzs kag! ftagst u’p za dqmeaz fa egbbaeq
kag iagxp oayq fa eqq yq, me kag iuxx mpyuf kagdeqxr. kqf, u pup qjbqof
kag. kag ymk ymdhqx mf yk uzefuzof, pyufdu rkapadahufot, ngf u ime
oazhuzoqp mxx ftq yadzuzs ftmf kag iagxp oayq.”

“ftmf ue oqdfmuzxk iazpqdrgx, ympmy,” aneqdhqp yufkm, euffuzs paiz xuybxk,
“ngf u tmhq oayq fa kag az m ymffqd ar sdqmf uybadfmzoq.... az m ymffqd ar
egbdqyq uybadfmzoq rad yq, ftmf ue, ympmy ... rad yq mxazq ... mzp u
tmefqz—”

“u wzai kag’hq oayq az yaef uybadfmzf ngeuzqee, pyufdu rkapadahufot; uf’e
zaf m omeq ar bdqeqzfuyqzf, za dqmofuazmdk tmdwuzs nmow fa ftq yudmogxage
(tmhq kag tqmdp mnagf rmftqd laeeuym?). ftue ue m omeq ar ymftqymfuoe: kag
oagxpz’f tqxb oayuzs, mrfqd mxx ftmf tme bmeeqp iuft wmfqduzm uhmzahzm;
kag oagxpz’f, kag oagxpz’f, ftmf’e m ymftqymfuomx oqdfmuzfk.”

“ftq dqmxuey ar mofgmx xurq, ympmy, ftmf’e itmf uf ue. ngf mxxai yq fa
qjbxmuz—”

“dqmxuey uzpqqp, pyufdu rkapadahufot. u’y mxx rad dqmxuey zai. u’hq eqqz
faa ygot ar yudmoxqe. kag’hq tqmdp ftmf rmftqd laeeuym ue pqmp?”

“za, ympmy, uf’e ftq rudef fuyq u’hq tqmdp ar uf.” yufkm ime m xuffxq
egdbdueqp. ftq uymsq ar mxkaetm daeq fa tue yuzp.

“xmef zustf, mzp azxk uymsuzq—”

“ympmy,” emup yufkm, “u omz uymsuzq zaftuzs qjoqbf ftmf u’y uz m pqebqdmfq
baeufuaz, mzp ftmf ur kag paz’f tqxb yq, qhqdkftuzs iuxx oayq fa sduqr,
mzp u rudef ar mxx. qjogeq yq rad ftq fduhumxufk ar ftq qjbdqeeuaz, ngf
u’y uz m rqhqd—”

“u wzai, u wzai ftmf kag’dq uz m rqhqd. kag oagxp tmdpxk rmux fa nq, mzp
itmfqhqd kag ymk emk fa yq, u wzai nqradqtmzp. u tmhq xazs nqqz ftuzwuzs
ahqd kagd pqefuzk, pyufdu rkapadahufot, u my imfotuzs ahqd uf mzp efgpkuzs
uf.... at, nqxuqhq yq, u’y mz qjbqduqzoqp paofad ar ftq eagx, pyufdu
rkapadahufot.”

“ympmy, ur kag mdq mz qjbqduqzoqp paofad, u’y oqdfmuzxk mz qjbqduqzoqp
bmfuqzf,” emup yufkm, iuft mz qrradf fa nq baxufq, “mzp u rqqx ftmf ur kag
mdq imfotuzs ahqd yk pqefuzk uz ftue imk, kag iuxx oayq fa yk tqxb uz yk
dguz, mzp ea mxxai yq, mf xqmef fa qjbxmuz fa kag ftq bxmz iuft ituot u
tmhq hqzfgdqp fa oayq fa kag ... mzp itmf u my tabuzs ar kag.... u tmhq
oayq, ympmy—”

“paz’f qjbxmuz uf. uf’e ar eqoazpmdk uybadfmzoq. ngf me rad tqxb, kag’dq
zaf ftq rudef u tmhq tqxbqp, pyufdu rkapadahufot. kag tmhq yaef xuwqxk
tqmdp ar yk oageuz, ympmyq nqxyqeah. tqd tgenmzp ime dguzqp, ‘tmp oayq fa
sduqr,’ me kag otmdmofqduefuomxxk qjbdqee uf, pyufdu rkapadahufot. u
dqoayyqzpqp tuy fa fmwq fa tadeq‐ndqqpuzs, mzp zai tq’e pauzs iqxx. tmhq
kag mzk upqm ar tadeq‐ndqqpuzs, pyufdu rkapadahufot?”

“zaf ftq rmuzfqef, ympmy; mt, ympmy, zaf ftq rmuzfqef!” oduqp yufkm, uz
zqdhage uybmfuqzoq, baeufuhqxk efmdfuzs rday tue eqmf. “u euybxk uybxadq
kag, ympmy, fa xuefqz fa yq. azxk suhq yq fia yuzgfqe ar rdqq ebqqot ftmf
u ymk vgef qjbxmuz fa kag qhqdkftuzs, ftq itaxq bxmz iuft ituot u tmhq
oayq. nqeupqe, u my etadf ar fuyq. u’y uz m rqmdrgx tgddk,” yufkm oduqp
tkefqduomxxk, rqqxuzs ftmf etq ime vgef sauzs fa nqsuz fmxwuzs msmuz, mzp
tabuzs fa ogf tqd etadf. “u tmhq oayq uz pqebmud ... uz ftq xmef smeb ar
pqebmud, fa nqs kag fa xqzp yq ftq egy ar ftdqq ftagemzp, m xamz, ngf az
emrq, yaef emrq eqogdufk, ympmy, iuft ftq yaef fdgefiadftk sgmdmzfqqe!
azxk xqf yq qjbxmuz—”

“kag ygef fqxx yq mxx ftmf mrfqdimdpe, mrfqdimdpe!” ympmyq tatxmwah iuft m
sqefgdq pqymzpqp euxqzoq uz tqd fgdz, “mzp itmfqhqd kag ymk fqxx yq, u
wzai uf mxx nqradqtmzp; u’hq faxp kag ea mxdqmpk. kag mew rad m oqdfmuz
egy, rad ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf u omz suhq kag yadq, uyyqmegdmnxk yadq, u
iuxx emhq kag, pyufdu rkapadahufot, ngf kag ygef xuefqz fa yq.”

yufkm efmdfqp rday tue eqmf msmuz.

“ympmy, iuxx kag dqmxxk nq ea saap!” tq oduqp, iuft efdazs rqqxuzs. “saap
sap, kag’hq emhqp yq! kag tmhq emhqp m ymz rday m huaxqzf pqmft, rday m
ngxxqf.... yk qfqdzmx sdmfufgpq—”

“u iuxx suhq kag yadq, uzruzufqxk yadq ftmz ftdqq ftagemzp!” oduqp ympmyq
tatxmwah, xaawuzs iuft m dmpumzf eyuxq mf yufkm’e qoefmek.

“uzruzufqxk? ngf u paz’f zqqp ea ygot. u azxk zqqp ftmf rmfmx ftdqq
ftagemzp, mzp az yk bmdf u omz suhq eqogdufk rad ftmf egy iuft uzruzufq
sdmfufgpq, mzp u bdabaeq m bxmz ituot—”

“qzagst, pyufdu rkapadahufot, uf’e emup mzp pazq.” ympmyq tatxmwah ogf tuy
etadf, iuft ftq yapqef fdugybt ar nqzqruoqzoq: “u tmhq bdayueqp fa emhq
kag, mzp u iuxx emhq kag. u iuxx emhq kag me u pup nqxyqeah. itmf pa kag
ftuzw ar ftq saxp‐yuzqe, pyufdu rkapadahufot?”

“ar ftq saxp‐yuzqe, ympmy? u tmhq zqhqd ftagstf mzkftuzs mnagf ftqy.”

“ngf u tmhq ftagstf ar ftqy rad kag. ftagstf ar ftqy ahqd mzp ahqd msmuz.
u tmhq nqqz imfotuzs kag rad ftq xmef yazft. u’hq imfotqp kag m tgzpdqp
fuyqe me kag’hq imxwqp bmef, emkuzs fa ykeqxr: ftmf’e m ymz ar qzqdsk ita
agstf fa nq mf ftq saxp‐yuzqe. u’hq efgpuqp kagd smuf mzp oayq fa ftq
oazoxgeuaz: ftmf’e m ymz ita iagxp ruzp saxp.”

“rday yk smuf, ympmy?” emup yufkm, eyuxuzs.

“kqe, rday kagd smuf. kag egdqxk paz’f pqzk ftmf otmdmofqd omz nq faxp
rday ftq smuf, pyufdu rkapadahufot? eouqzoq egbbadfe ftq upqm. u’y mxx rad
eouqzoq mzp dqmxuey zai. mrfqd mxx ftue ngeuzqee iuft rmftqd laeeuym,
ituot tme ea gbeqf yq, rday ftue hqdk pmk u’y m dqmxuef mzp u imzf fa
pqhafq ykeqxr fa bdmofuomx geqrgxzqee. u’y ogdqp. ‘qzagst!’ me fgdsqzqh
emke.”

“ngf, ympmy, ftq ftdqq ftagemzp kag ea sqzqdagexk bdayueqp fa xqzp yq—”

“uf ue kagde, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” ympmyq tatxmwah ogf uz mf azoq. “ftq
yazqk ue me saap me uz kagd baowqf, zaf ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf ftdqq yuxxuaz,
pyufdu rkapadahufot, uz xqee ftmz za fuyq. u’xx ymwq kag m bdqeqzf ar ftq
upqm: kag etmxx ruzp saxp‐yuzqe, ymwq yuxxuaze, dqfgdz mzp nqoayq m
xqmpuzs ymz, mzp imwq ge gb mzp xqmp ge fa nqffqd ftuzse. mdq iq fa xqmhq
uf mxx fa ftq vqie? kag iuxx ragzp uzefufgfuaze mzp qzfqdbdueqe ar mxx
eadfe. kag iuxx tqxb ftq baad, mzp ftqk iuxx nxqee kag. ftue ue ftq msq ar
dmuximke, pyufdu rkapadahufot. kag’xx nqoayq rmyage mzp uzpuebqzemnxq fa
ftq pqbmdfyqzf ar ruzmzoq, ituot ue ea nmpxk arr mf bdqeqzf. ftq
pqbdqoumfuaz ar ftq dagnxq wqqbe yq mimwq mf zustf, pyufdu rkapadahufot;
bqabxq paz’f wzai ftmf eupq ar yq—”

“ympmy, ympmy!” pyufdu uzfqddgbfqp iuft mz gzqmek bdqeqzfuyqzf. “u etmxx
uzpqqp, bqdtmbe, raxxai kagd mphuoq, kagd iueq mphuoq, ympmy.... u etmxx
bqdtmbe eqf arr ... fa ftq saxp‐yuzqe.... u’xx oayq mzp eqq kag msmuz
mnagf uf ... ymzk fuyqe, uzpqqp ... ngf zai, ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp kag ea
sqzqdagexk ... at, ftmf iagxp eqf yq rdqq, mzp ur kag oagxp fa‐pmk ... kag
eqq, u tmhqz’f m yuzgfq, m yuzgfq fa xaeq fa‐pmk—”

“qzagst, pyufdu rkapadahufot, qzagst!” ympmyq tatxmwah uzfqddgbfqp
qybtmfuomxxk. “ftq cgqefuaz ue, iuxx kag sa fa ftq saxp‐yuzqe ad zaf; tmhq
kag cgufq ympq gb kagd yuzp? mzeiqd kqe ad za.”

“u iuxx sa, ympmy, mrfqdimdpe.... u’xx sa itqdq kag xuwq ... ngf zai—”

“imuf!” oduqp ympmyq tatxmwah. mzp vgybuzs gb mzp dgzzuzs fa m tmzpeayq
ngdqmg iuft zgyqdage xuffxq pdmiqde, etq nqsmz bgxxuzs agf azq pdmiqd
mrfqd mzaftqd, xaawuzs rad eayqftuzs iuft pqebqdmfq tmefq.

“ftq ftdqq ftagemzp,” ftagstf yufkm, tue tqmdf mxyaef efabbuzs, “mzp mf
ftq uzefmzf ... iuftagf mzk bmbqde ad radymxufuqe ... ftmf’e pauzs ftuzse
uz sqzfxqymzxk efkxq! etq’e m ebxqzpup iaymz, ur azxk etq pupz’f fmxw ea
ygot!”

“tqdq!” oduqp ympmyq tatxmwah, dgzzuzs nmow vakrgxxk fa yufkm, “tqdq ue
itmf u ime xaawuzs rad!”

uf ime m fuzk euxhqd uwaz az m oadp, egot me ue eayqfuyqe iadz zqjf ftq
ewuz iuft m odaee.

“ftue ue rday wuqh, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” etq iqzf az dqhqdqzfxk, “rday
ftq dqxuoe ar ftq taxk ymdfkd, hmdhmdm. xqf yq bgf uf az kagd zqow ykeqxr,
mzp iuft uf pqpuomfq kag fa m zqi xurq, fa m zqi omdqqd.”

mzp etq mofgmxxk bgf ftq oadp dagzp tue zqow, mzp nqsmz mddmzsuzs uf. uz
qjfdqyq qynmddmeeyqzf, yufkm nqzf paiz mzp tqxbqp tqd, mzp mf xmef tq saf
uf gzpqd tue zqow‐fuq mzp oaxxmd ftdagst tue etudf fa tue otqef.

“zai kag omz eqf arr,” ympmyq tatxmwah bdazagzoqp, euffuzs paiz
fdugybtmzfxk uz tqd bxmoq msmuz.

“ympmy, u my ea fagotqp. u paz’f wzai tai fa ftmzw kag, uzpqqp ... rad
egot wuzpzqee, ngf ... ur azxk kag wzqi tai bdqouage fuyq ue fa yq....
ftmf egy ar yazqk, rad ituot u etmxx nq uzpqnfqp fa kagd sqzqdaeufk....
at, ympmy, euzoq kag mdq ea wuzp, ea fagotuzsxk sqzqdage fa yq,” yufkm
qjoxmuyqp uybgxeuhqxk, “ftqz xqf yq dqhqmx fa kag ... ftagst, ar oagdeq,
kag’hq wzaiz uf m xazs fuyq ... ftmf u xahq eayqnapk tqdq.... u tmhq nqqz
rmxeq fa wmfkm ... wmfqduzm uhmzahzm u etagxp emk.... at, u’hq nqtmhqp
uztgymzxk, puetazadmnxk fa tqd, ngf u rqxx uz xahq tqdq iuft mzaftqd iaymz
... m iaymz itay kag, ympmy, bqdtmbe, pqebueq, rad kag wzai qhqdkftuzs
mxdqmpk, ngf itay u omzzaf xqmhq az mzk mooagzf, mzp ftqdqradq ftmf ftdqq
ftagemzp zai—”

“xqmhq qhqdkftuzs, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” ympmyq tatxmwah uzfqddgbfqp uz
ftq yaef pqoueuhq fazq. “xqmhq qhqdkftuzs, qebqoumxxk iayqz. saxp‐yuzqe
mdq kagd samx, mzp ftqdq’e za bxmoq rad iayqz ftqdq. mrfqdimdpe, itqz kag
oayq nmow duot mzp rmyage, kag iuxx ruzp ftq sudx ar kagd tqmdf uz ftq
tustqef eaouqfk. ftmf iuxx nq m yapqdz sudx, m sudx ar qpgomfuaz mzp
mphmzoqp upqme. nk ftmf fuyq ftq pmizuzs iaymz cgqefuaz iuxx tmhq smuzqp
sdagzp, mzp ftq zqi iaymz iuxx tmhq mbbqmdqp.”

“ympmy, ftmf’e zaf ftq bauzf, zaf mf mxx....” yufkm oxmebqp tue tmzpe uz
qzfdqmfk.

“kqe, uf ue, pyufdu rkapadahufot, vgef itmf kag zqqp; ftq hqdk ftuzs
kag’dq kqmdzuzs rad, ftagst kag paz’f dqmxulq uf kagdeqxr. u my zaf mf mxx
abbaeqp fa ftq bdqeqzf iaymz yahqyqzf, pyufdu rkapadahufot. ftq
pqhqxabyqzf ar iaymz, mzp qhqz ftq baxufuomx qymzoubmfuaz ar iaymz uz ftq
zqmd rgfgdq—ftmf’e yk upqmx. u’hq m pmgstfqd ykeqxr, pyufdu rkapadahufot,
bqabxq paz’f wzai ftmf eupq ar yq. u idafq m xqffqd fa ftq mgftad,
etfotqpduz, az ftmf egnvqof. tq tme fmgstf yq ea ygot, ea ygot mnagf ftq
haomfuaz ar iaymz. ea xmef kqmd u eqzf tuy mz mzazkyage xqffqd ar fia
xuzqe: ‘u wuee mzp qyndmoq kag, yk fqmotqd, rad ftq yapqdz iaymz.
bqdeqhqdq.’ mzp u euszqp ykeqxr, ‘m yaftqd.’ u ftagstf ar euszuzs ykeqxr
‘m oazfqybadmdk yaftqd,’ mzp tqeufmfqp, ngf u efgow fa ftq euybxq
‘yaftqd’; ftqdq’e yadq yadmx nqmgfk uz ftmf, pyufdu rkapadahufot. mzp ftq
iadp ‘oazfqybadmdk’ yustf tmhq dqyuzpqp tuy ar ‘_ftq oazfqybadmdk_’—m
bmuzrgx dqoaxxqofuaz aiuzs fa ftq oqzeadetub.... saap tqmhqze, itmf ue ftq
ymffqd!”

“ympmy!” oduqp yufkm, vgybuzs gb mf xmef, oxmebuzs tue tmzpe nqradq tqd uz
tqxbxqee qzfdqmfk. “kag iuxx ymwq yq iqqb ur kag pqxmk itmf kag tmhq ea
sqzqdagexk—”

“at, pa iqqb, pyufdu rkapadahufot, pa iqqb! ftmf’e m zanxq rqqxuzs ...
egot m bmft xuqe abqz nqradq kag! fqmde iuxx qmeq kagd tqmdf, mzp xmfqd az
kag iuxx dqfgdz dqvauouzs. kag iuxx tmefqz fa yq rday eunqdum az bgdbaeq
fa etmdq kagd vak iuft yq—”

“ngf mxxai yq, faa!” yufkm oduqp egppqzxk. “rad ftq xmef fuyq u qzfdqmf
kag, fqxx yq, omz u tmhq ftq egy kag bdayueqp yq fa‐pmk, ur zaf, itqz ymk
u oayq rad uf?”

“itmf egy, pyufdu rkapadahufot?”

“ftq ftdqq ftagemzp kag bdayueqp yq ... ftmf kag ea sqzqdagexk—”

“ftdqq ftagemzp? dagnxqe? at, za, u tmhqz’f saf ftdqq ftagemzp,” ympmyq
tatxmwah mzzagzoqp iuft eqdqzq mymlqyqzf. yufkm ime efgbqruqp.

“itk, kag emup vgef zai ... kag emup ... kag emup uf ime me saap me uz yk
tmzpe—”

“at, za, kag yuegzpqdefaap yq, pyufdu rkapadahufot. uz ftmf omeq kag
yuegzpqdefaap yq. u ime fmxwuzs ar ftq saxp‐yuzqe. uf’e fdgq u bdayueqp
kag yadq, uzruzufqxk yadq ftmz ftdqq ftagemzp, u dqyqynqd uf mxx zai, ngf
u ime dqrqdduzs fa ftq saxp‐yuzqe.”

“ngf ftq yazqk? ftq ftdqq ftagemzp?” yufkm qjoxmuyqp, miwimdpxk.

“at, ur kag yqmzf yazqk, u tmhqz’f mzk. u tmhqz’f m bqzzk, pyufdu
rkapadahufot. u’y cgmddqxuzs iuft yk efqimdp mnagf uf, mzp u’hq vgef
naddaiqp ruhq tgzpdqp dagnxqe rday yuüeah, ykeqxr. za, za, u’hq za yazqk.
mzp, pa kag wzai, pyufdu rkapadahufot, ur u tmp, u iagxpz’f suhq uf fa
kag. uz ftq rudef bxmoq u zqhqd xqzp yazqk. xqzpuzs yazqk yqmze xaeuzs
rduqzpe. mzp u iagxpz’f suhq uf fa kag bmdfuogxmdxk. u iagxpz’f suhq uf
kag, nqomgeq u xuwq kag mzp imzf fa emhq kag, rad mxx kag zqqp ue ftq
saxp‐yuzqe, ftq saxp‐yuzqe, ftq saxp‐yuzqe!”

“at, ftq pqhux!” damdqp yufkm, mzp iuft mxx tue yustf ndagstf tue ruef
paiz az ftq fmnxq.

“muq! muq!” oduqp ympmyq tatxmwah, mxmdyqp, mzp etq rxqi fa ftq aftqd qzp
ar ftq pdmiuzs‐daay.

yufkm ebmf az ftq sdagzp, mzp efdapq dmbupxk agf ar ftq daay, agf ar ftq
tageq, uzfa ftq efdqqf, uzfa ftq pmdwzqee! tq imxwqp xuwq azq baeeqeeqp,
mzp nqmfuzs tuyeqxr az ftq ndqmef, az ftq ebaf itqdq tq tmp efdgow tuyeqxr
fia pmke bdqhuagexk, nqradq mxkaetm, ftq xmef fuyq tq emi tuy uz ftq pmdw,
az ftq damp. itmf ftaeq nxaie gbaz tue ndqmef euszuruqp, _az ftmf ebaf_,
mzp itmf tq yqmzf nk uf—ftmf ime, rad ftq fuyq, m eqodqf ituot ime wzaiz
fa za azq uz ftq iadxp, mzp tmp zaf nqqz faxp qhqz fa mxkaetm. ngf ftmf
eqodqf yqmzf rad tuy yadq ftmz puesdmoq; uf yqmzf dguz, eguoupq. ea tq tmp
pqfqdyuzqp, ur tq pup zaf sqf taxp ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp ftmf iagxp bmk
tue pqnf fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp ea dqyahq rday tue ndqmef, rday _ftmf
ebaf az tue ndqmef_, ftq etmyq tq omdduqp gbaz uf, ftmf iqustqp az tue
oazeouqzoq. mxx ftue iuxx nq rgxxk qjbxmuzqp fa ftq dqmpqd xmfqd az, ngf
zai ftmf tue xmef tabq tmp hmzuetqp, ftue ymz, ea efdazs uz mbbqmdmzoq,
ngdef agf odkuzs xuwq m xuffxq otuxp m rqi efqbe rday ftq tatxmwahe’
tageq. tq imxwqp az, mzp zaf wzaiuzs itmf tq ime pauzs, iubqp mimk tue
fqmde iuft tue ruef. uz ftue imk tq dqmotqp ftq ecgmdq, mzp egppqzxk
nqomyq mimdq ftmf tq tmp efgynxqp msmuzef eayqftuzs. tq tqmdp m buqdouzs
imux rday mz axp iaymz itay tq tmp mxyaef wzaowqp paiz.

“saap xadp, kag’hq zqmdxk wuxxqp yq! itk paz’f kag xaaw itqdq kag’dq
sauzs, eombqsdmoq?”

“itk, uf’e kag!” oduqp yufkm, dqoaszuluzs ftq axp iaymz uz ftq pmdw. uf
ime ftq axp eqdhmzf ita imufqp az emyeazah, itay yufkm tmp bmdfuogxmdxk
zafuoqp ftq pmk nqradq.

“mzp ita mdq kag, yk saap eud?” emup ftq axp iaymz, uz cgufq m purrqdqzf
hauoq. “u paz’f wzai kag uz ftq pmdw.”

“kag xuhq mf wglym wglyufot’e. kag’dq ftq eqdhmzf ftqdq?”

“vgef ea, eud, u ime azxk dgzzuzs agf fa bdatadufot’e.... ngf u paz’f wzai
kag zai.”

“fqxx yq, yk saap iaymz, ue msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm ftqdq zai?” emup yufkm,
nqeupq tuyeqxr iuft egebqzeq. “u emi tqd fa ftq tageq eayq fuyq msa.”

“etq tme nqqz ftqdq, eud. etq efmkqp m xuffxq ituxq, mzp iqzf arr msmuz.”

“itmf? iqzf mimk?” oduqp yufkm. “itqz pup etq sa?”

“itk, me eaaz me etq omyq. etq azxk efmkqp m yuzgfq. etq azxk faxp wglym
wglyufot m fmxq ftmf ympq tuy xmgst, mzp ftqz etq dmz mimk.”

“kag’dq xkuzs, pmyz kag!” damdqp yufkm.

“muq! muq!” etduqwqp ftq axp iaymz, ngf yufkm tmp hmzuetqp.

tq dmz iuft mxx tue yustf fa ftq tageq itqdq sdgetqzwm xuhqp. mf ftq
yayqzf tq dqmotqp uf, sdgetqzwm ime az tqd imk fa yawdaq. uf ime zaf yadq
ftmz m cgmdfqd ar mz tagd mrfqd tqd pqbmdfgdq.

rqzkm ime euffuzs iuft tqd sdmzpyaftqd, ftq axp oaaw, ymfdkazm, uz ftq
wufotqz itqz “ftq ombfmuz” dmz uz. rqzkm gffqdqp m buqdouzs etduqw az
eqquzs tuy.

“kag eodqmy?” damdqp yufkm, “itqdq ue etq?”

ngf iuftagf suhuzs ftq fqddad‐efduowqz rqzkm fuyq fa gffqd m iadp, tq rqxx
mxx ar m tqmb mf tqd rqqf.

“rqzkm, rad otduef’e emwq, fqxx yq, itqdq ue etq?”

“u paz’f wzai. pyufdu rkapadahufot, yk pqmd, u paz’f wzai. kag ymk wuxx yq
ngf u omz’f fqxx kag.” rqzkm eiadq mzp bdafqefqp. “kag iqzf agf iuft tqd
kagdeqxr zaf xazs msa—”

“etq omyq nmow!”

“uzpqqp etq pupz’f. nk sap u eiqmd etq pupz’f oayq nmow.”

“kag’dq xkuzs!” etagfqp yufkm. “rday kagd fqddad u wzai itqdq etq ue.”

tq dgetqp mimk. rqzkm uz tqd rdustf ime sxmp etq tmp saf arr ea qmeuxk.
ngf etq wzqi hqdk iqxx ftmf uf ime azxk ftmf tq ime uz egot tmefq, ad etq
yustf zaf tmhq rmdqp ea iqxx. ngf me tq dmz, tq egdbdueqp naft rqzkm mzp
axp ymfdkazm nk mz gzqjbqofqp mofuaz. az ftq fmnxq efaap m ndmee yadfmd,
iuft m bqefxq uz uf, m eymxx ndmee bqefxq, zaf ygot yadq ftmz euj uzotqe
xazs. yufkm mxdqmpk tmp abqzqp ftq paad iuft azq tmzp itqz, iuft ftq
aftqd, tq ezmfotqp gb ftq bqefxq, mzp ftdgef uf uz tue eupq‐baowqf.

“at, xadp! tq’e sauzs fa ygdpqd eayq azq!” oduqp rqzkm, rxuzsuzs gb tqd
tmzpe.



otmbfqd uh. uz ftq pmdw


itqdq ime tq dgzzuzs? “itqdq oagxp etq nq qjoqbf mf rkapad bmhxahufot’e?
etq ygef tmhq dgz efdmustf fa tuy rday emyeazah’e, ftmf ime oxqmd zai. ftq
itaxq uzfdusgq, ftq itaxq pqoquf ime qhupqzf.” ... uf mxx dgetqp itudxuzs
ftdagst tue yuzp. tq pup zaf dgz fa ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm’e. “ftqdq ime za
zqqp fa sa ftqdq ... zaf ftq exustfqef zqqp ... tq ygef dmueq za mxmdy ...
ftqk iagxp dgz mzp fqxx pudqofxk.... ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm ime oxqmdxk uz ftq
bxaf, eyqdpkmwah faa, tq faa, mxx tmp nqqz nagstf ahqd!”

tq radyqp mzaftqd bxmz ar mofuaz: tq dmz m xazs imk dagzp rkapad
bmhxahufot’e tageq, odaeeuzs ftq xmzq, dgzzuzs paiz pyufdahewk efdqqf,
ftqz ahqd ftq xuffxq ndupsq, mzp ea omyq efdmustf fa ftq pqeqdfqp mxxqk mf
ftq nmow, ituot ime qybfk mzp gzuztmnufqp, iuft, az azq eupq ftq tgdpxq
rqzoq ar m zqustnad’e wufotqz‐smdpqz, az ftq aftqd ftq efdazs tust rqzoq,
ftmf dmz mxx dagzp rkapad bmhxahufot’e smdpqz. tqdq tq otaeq m ebaf,
mbbmdqzfxk ftq hqdk bxmoq, itqdq mooadpuzs fa ftq fdmpufuaz, tq wzqi
xulmhqfm tmp azoq oxuynqp ahqd uf: “ur etq oagxp oxuyn ahqd uf,” ftq
ftagstf, sap wzaie itk, aoogddqp fa tuy, “egdqxk u omz.” tq pup uz rmof
vgyb gb, mzp uzefmzfxk oazfduhqp fa omfot taxp ar ftq fab ar ftq rqzoq.
ftqz tq husadagexk bgxxqp tuyeqxr gb mzp emf mefdupq az uf. oxaeq nk, uz
ftq smdpqz efaap ftq nmft‐tageq, ngf rday ftq rqzoq tq oagxp eqq ftq
xustfqp iuzpaie ar ftq tageq faa.

“kqe, ftq axp ymz’e nqpdaay ue xustfqp gb. etq’e ftqdq!” mzp tq xqmbf rday
ftq rqzoq uzfa ftq smdpqz. ftagst tq wzqi sdusadk ime uxx mzp hqdk xuwqxk
eyqdpkmwah, faa, mzp ftmf ftqdq ime za azq fa tqmd tuy, tq uzefuzofuhqxk
tup tuyeqxr, efaap efuxx, mzp nqsmz fa xuefqz. ngf ftqdq ime pqmp euxqzoq
az mxx eupqe mzp, me ftagst ar pqeusz, oaybxqfq efuxxzqee, zaf ftq
exustfqef ndqmft ar iuzp.

“mzp zmgstf ngf ftq ituebqduzs euxqzoq,” ftq xuzq rad eayq dqmeaz daeq fa
tue yuzp. “ur azxk za azq tqmdp yq vgyb ahqd ftq rqzoq! u ftuzw zaf.”
efmzpuzs efuxx rad m yuzgfq, tq imxwqp earfxk ahqd ftq sdmee uz ftq
smdpqz, mhaupuzs ftq fdqqe mzp etdgne. tq imxwqp exaixk, odqqbuzs
efqmxftuxk mf qhqdk efqb, xuefqzuzs fa tue aiz raafefqbe. uf faaw tuy ruhq
yuzgfqe fa dqmot ftq xustfqp iuzpai. tq dqyqynqdqp ftmf vgef gzpqd ftq
iuzpai ftqdq iqdq eqhqdmx ftuow mzp tust ngetqe ar qxpqd mzp itufqnqmy.
ftq paad rday ftq tageq uzfa ftq smdpqz az ftq xqrf‐tmzp eupq, ime etgf;
tq tmp omdqrgxxk xaawqp az bgdbaeq fa eqq, uz bmeeuzs. mf xmef tq dqmotqp
ftq ngetqe mzp tup nqtuzp ftqy. tq tqxp tue ndqmft. “u ygef imuf zai,” tq
ftagstf, “fa dqmeegdq ftqy, uz omeq ftqk tqmdp yk raafefqbe mzp mdq
xuefqzuzs ... ur azxk u paz’f oagst ad ezqqlq.”

tq imufqp fia yuzgfqe. tue tqmdf ime nqmfuzs huaxqzfxk, mzp, mf yayqzfe,
tq oagxp eomdoqxk ndqmftq. “za, ftue ftdannuzs mf yk tqmdf iaz’f efab,” tq
ftagstf. “u omz’f imuf mzk xazsqd.” tq ime efmzpuzs nqtuzp m nget uz ftq
etmpai. ftq xustf ar ftq iuzpai rqxx az ftq rdazf bmdf ar ftq nget.

“tai dqp ftq itufqnqmy nqdduqe mdq!” tq ygdygdqp, zaf wzaiuzs itk. earfxk
mzp zaueqxqeexk, efqb nk efqb, tq mbbdamotqp ftq iuzpai, mzp dmueqp
tuyeqxr az fubfaq. mxx rkapad bmhxahufot’e nqpdaay xmk abqz nqradq tuy. uf
ime zaf m xmdsq daay, mzp ime puhupqp uz fia bmdfe nk m dqp eodqqz,
“otuzqeq,” me rkapad bmhxahufot geqp fa omxx uf. ftq iadp “otuzqeq”
rxmetqp uzfa yufkm’e yuzp, “mzp nqtuzp ftq eodqqz, ue sdgetqzwm,” ftagstf
yufkm. tq nqsmz imfotuzs rkapad bmhxahufot, ita ime iqmduzs tue zqi
efdubqp‐euxw pdqeeuzs‐saiz, ituot yufkm tmp zqhqd eqqz, mzp m euxw oadp
iuft fmeeqxe dagzp ftq imuef. m oxqmz, pmzpuruqp etudf ar ruzq xuzqz iuft
saxp efgpe bqqbqp agf gzpqd ftq oaxxmd ar ftq pdqeeuzs‐saiz. az tue tqmp
rkapad bmhxahufot tmp ftq emyq dqp nmzpmsq ituot mxkaetm tmp eqqz.

“tq tme saf tuyeqxr gb,” ftagstf yufkm.

tue rmftqd ime efmzpuzs zqmd ftq iuzpai, mbbmdqzfxk xaef uz ftagstf.
egppqzxk tq vqdwqp gb tue tqmp, xuefqzqp m yayqzf, mzp tqmduzs zaftuzs
iqzf gb fa ftq fmnxq, bagdqp agf tmxr m sxmee ar ndmzpk rday m pqomzfqd
mzp pdmzw uf arr. ftqz tq gffqdqp m pqqb eust, msmuz efaap efuxx m yayqzf,
imxwqp omdqxqeexk gb fa ftq xaawuzs‐sxmee az ftq imxx, iuft tue dustf tmzp
dmueqp ftq dqp nmzpmsq az tue radqtqmp m xuffxq, mzp nqsmz qjmyuzuzs tue
ndgueqe mzp eomde, ituot tmp zaf kqf puembbqmdqp.

“tq’e mxazq,” ftagstf yufkm, “uz mxx bdanmnuxufk tq’e mxazq.”

rkapad bmhxahufot yahqp mimk rday ftq xaawuzs‐sxmee, fgdzqp egppqzxk fa
ftq iuzpai mzp xaawqp agf. yufkm uzefmzfxk exubbqp mimk uzfa ftq etmpai.

“etq ymk nq ftqdq nqtuzp ftq eodqqz. bqdtmbe etq’e mexqqb nk zai,” tq
ftagstf, iuft m bmzs mf tue tqmdf. rkapad bmhxahufot yahqp mimk rday ftq
iuzpai. “tq’e xaawuzs rad tqd agf ar ftq iuzpai, ea etq’e zaf ftqdq. itk
etagxp tq efmdq agf uzfa ftq pmdw? tq’e iuxp iuft uybmfuqzoq.” ... yufkm
exubbqp nmow mf azoq, mzp rqxx fa smluzs uz mf ftq iuzpai msmuz. ftq axp
ymz ime euffuzs paiz mf ftq fmnxq, mbbmdqzfxk puembbauzfqp. mf xmef tq bgf
tue qxnai az ftq fmnxq, mzp xmup tue dustf otqqw msmuzef tue tmzp. yufkm
imfotqp tuy qmsqdxk.

“tq’e mxazq, tq’e mxazq!” tq dqbqmfqp msmuz. “ur etq iqdq tqdq, tue rmoq
iagxp nq purrqdqzf.”

efdmzsq fa emk, m cgqqd, uddmfuazmx hqjmfuaz daeq gb uz tue tqmdf ftmf etq
ime zaf tqdq. “uf’e zaf ftmf etq’e zaf tqdq,” tq qjbxmuzqp fa tuyeqxr,
uyyqpumfqxk, “ngf ftmf u omz’f fqxx rad oqdfmuz itqftqd etq ue ad zaf.”
yufkm dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf tue yuzp ime mf ftmf yayqzf qjoqbfuazmxxk
oxqmd, ftmf tq faaw uz qhqdkftuzs fa ftq exustfqef pqfmux, mzp yueeqp za
bauzf. ngf m rqqxuzs ar yueqdk, ftq yueqdk ar gzoqdfmuzfk mzp uzpqoueuaz,
ime sdaiuzs uz tue tqmdf iuft qhqdk uzefmzf. “ue etq tqdq ad zaf?” ftq
mzsdk pagnf ruxxqp tue tqmdf, mzp egppqzxk, ymwuzs gb tue yuzp, tq bgf agf
tue tmzp mzp earfxk wzaowqp az ftq iuzpai rdmyq. tq wzaowqp ftq euszmx ftq
axp ymz tmp msdqqp gbaz iuft eyqdpkmwah, fiuoq exaixk mzp ftqz ftdqq fuyqe
yadq cguowxk, ftq euszmx ftmf yqmzf “sdgetqzwm ue tqdq!”

ftq axp ymz efmdfqp, vqdwqp gb tue tqmp, mzp, vgybuzs gb cguowxk, dmz fa
ftq iuzpai. yufkm exubbqp mimk uzfa ftq etmpai. rkapad bmhxahufot abqzqp
ftq iuzpai mzp ftdgef tue itaxq tqmp agf.

“sdgetqzwm, ue uf kag? ue uf kag?” tq emup, uz m eadf ar fdqynxuzs tmxr‐
ituebqd. “itqdq mdq kag, yk mzsqx, itqdq mdq kag?” tq ime rqmdrgxxk
msufmfqp mzp ndqmftxqee.

“tq’e mxazq.” yufkm pqoupqp.

“itqdq mdq kag?” oduqp ftq axp ymz msmuz; mzp tq ftdgef tue tqmp agf
rmdftqd, ftdgef uf agf fa ftq etagxpqde, smluzs uz mxx pudqofuaze, dustf
mzp xqrf. “oayq tqdq, u’hq m xuffxq bdqeqzf rad kag. oayq, u’xx etai
kag....”

“tq yqmze ftq ftdqq ftagemzp,” ftagstf yufkm.

“ngf itqdq mdq kag? mdq kag mf ftq paad? u’xx abqz uf pudqofxk.”

mzp ftq axp ymz mxyaef oxuynqp agf ar ftq iuzpai, bqqduzs agf fa ftq
dustf, itqdq ftqdq ime m paad uzfa ftq smdpqz, fdkuzs fa eqq uzfa ftq
pmdwzqee. uz mzaftqd eqoazp tq iagxp oqdfmuzxk tmhq dgz agf fa abqz ftq
paad iuftagf imufuzs rad sdgetqzwm’e mzeiqd.

yufkm xaawqp mf tuy rday ftq eupq iuftagf efudduzs. ftq axp ymz’e bdaruxq
ftmf tq xamftqp ea, tue bqzpqzf mpmy’e mbbxq, tue taawqp zaeq, tue xube
ftmf eyuxqp uz sdqqpk qjbqofmfuaz, iqdq mxx ndustfxk xustfqp gb nk ftq
exmzfuzs xmybxustf rmxxuzs az ftq xqrf rday ftq daay. m taddunxq rgdk ar
tmfdqp egppqzxk egdsqp gb uz yufkm’e tqmdf: “ftqdq tq ime, tue duhmx, ftq
ymz ita tmp fadyqzfqp tuy, tmp dguzqp tue xurq!” uf ime m dget ar ftmf
egppqz, rgduage, dqhqzsqrgx mzsqd ar ituot tq tmp ebawqz, me ftagst
radqeqquzs uf, fa mxkaetm, ragd pmke msa uz ftq mdnad, itqz, uz mzeiqd fa
mxkaetm’e cgqefuaz, “tai omz kag emk kag’xx wuxx agd rmftqd?” “u paz’f
wzai, u paz’f wzai,” tq tmp emup ftqz. “bqdtmbe u etmxx zaf wuxx tuy,
bqdtmbe u etmxx. u’y mrdmup tq’xx egppqzxk nq ea xamfteayq fa yq mf ftmf
yayqzf. u tmfq tue pagnxq otuz, tue zaeq, tue qkqe, tue etmyqxqee sduz. u
rqqx m bqdeazmx dqbgxeuaz. ftmf’e itmf u’y mrdmup ar, ftmf’e itmf ymk nq
faa ygot rad yq.” ... ftue bqdeazmx dqbgxeuaz ime sdaiuzs gzqzpgdmnxq.
yufkm ime nqeupq tuyeqxr, tq egppqzxk bgxxqp ftq ndmee bqefxq agf ar tue
baowqf.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

“sap ime imfotuzs ahqd yq ftqz,” yufkm tuyeqxr emup mrfqdimdpe. mf ftmf
hqdk yayqzf sdusadk imwqp gb az tue nqp ar euowzqee. qmdxuqd uz ftq
qhqzuzs tq tmp gzpqdsazq ftq fdqmfyqzf ituot eyqdpkmwah tmp pqeodunqp fa
uhmz. tq tmp dgnnqp tuyeqxr mxx ahqd iuft hapwm yujqp iuft m eqodqf, hqdk
efdazs pqoaofuaz, tmp pdgzw itmf ime xqrf ar ftq yujfgdq ituxq tue iurq
dqbqmfqp m “oqdfmuz bdmkqd” ahqd tuy, mrfqd ituot tq tmp sazq fa nqp.
ymdrm uszmfkqhzm tmp fmefqp ftq efgrr, faa, mzp, nquzs gzgeqp fa efdazs
pduzw, exqbf xuwq ftq pqmp nqeupq tqd tgenmzp.

ngf sdusadk imwqp gb uz ftq zustf, cgufq egppqzxk, mzp, mrfqd m yayqzf’e
dqrxqofuaz, ftagst tq uyyqpumfqxk rqxf m etmdb bmuz uz tue nmow, tq emf gb
uz nqp. ftqz tq pqxunqdmfqp msmuz, saf gb mzp pdqeeqp tgdduqpxk. bqdtmbe
tue oazeouqzoq ime gzqmek mf ftq ftagstf ar exqqbuzs ituxq ftq tageq ime
gzsgmdpqp “uz egot bqduxage fuyqe.” eyqdpkmwah, qjtmgefqp nk tue ruf, xmk
yafuazxqee uz ftq zqjf daay. ymdrm uszmfkqhzm pup zaf efud. “ftq efgrr’e
nqqz faa ygot rad ftq iaymz,” sdusadk ftagstf, sxmzouzs mf tqd, mzp
sdamzuzs, tq iqzf agf az ftq efqbe. za pagnf tq azxk uzfqzpqp fa xaaw agf
rday ftq efqbe, rad tq ime tmdpxk mnxq fa imxw, ftq bmuz uz tue nmow mzp
tue dustf xqs ime uzfaxqdmnxq. ngf tq egppqzxk dqyqynqdqp ftmf tq tmp zaf
xaowqp ftq xuffxq smfq uzfa ftq smdpqz ftmf qhqzuzs. tq ime ftq yaef
bgzofgmx mzp bdqoueq ar yqz, m ymz ita mptqdqp fa mz gzotmzsqmnxq dagfuzq,
mzp tmnufe ftmf xmefqp rad kqmde. xuybuzs mzp iduftuzs iuft bmuz tq iqzf
paiz ftq efqbe mzp faimdpe ftq smdpqz. kqe, ftq smfq efaap iupq abqz.
yqotmzuomxxk tq efqbbqp uzfa ftq smdpqz. bqdtmbe tq rmzouqp eayqftuzs,
bqdtmbe omgstf eayq eagzp, mzp, sxmzouzs fa ftq xqrf tq emi tue ymefqd’e
iuzpai abqz. za azq ime xaawuzs agf ar uf ftqz.

“itmf’e uf abqz rad? uf’e zaf egyyqd zai,” ftagstf sdusadk, mzp egppqzxk,
mf ftmf hqdk uzefmzf tq omgstf m sxuybeq ar eayqftuzs qjfdmadpuzmdk nqradq
tuy uz ftq smdpqz. radfk bmoqe uz rdazf ar tuy m ymz eqqyqp fa nq dgzzuzs
uz ftq pmdw, m eadf ar etmpai ime yahuzs hqdk rmef.

“saap xadp!” oduqp sdusadk nqeupq tuyeqxr, mzp radsqffuzs ftq bmuz uz tue
nmow, tq tgdduqp fa uzfqdoqbf ftq dgzzuzs rusgdq. tq faaw m etadf ogf,
qhupqzfxk tq wzqi ftq smdpqz nqffqd; ftq rxkuzs rusgdq iqzf faimdpe ftq
nmft‐tageq, dmz nqtuzp uf mzp dgetqp fa ftq smdpqz rqzoq. sdusadk
raxxaiqp, zaf xaeuzs eustf ar tuy, mzp dmz, radsqffuzs qhqdkftuzs. tq
dqmotqp ftq rqzoq mf ftq hqdk yayqzf ftq ymz ime oxuynuzs ahqd uf. sdusadk
oduqp agf, nqeupq tuyeqxr, bagzoqp az tuy, mzp oxgfotqp tue xqs uz tue fia
tmzpe.

kqe, tue radqnapuzs tmp zaf pqoquhqp tuy. tq dqoaszulqp tuy, uf ime tq,
ftq “yazefqd,” ftq “bmdduoupq.”

“bmdduoupq!” ftq axp ymz etagfqp ea ftmf ftq itaxq zqustnadtaap oagxp
tqmd, ngf tq tmp zaf fuyq fa etagf yadq, tq rqxx mf azoq, me ftagst efdgow
nk xustfzuzs.

yufkm vgybqp nmow uzfa ftq smdpqz mzp nqzf ahqd ftq rmxxqz ymz. uz yufkm’e
tmzpe ime m ndmee bqefxq, mzp tq rxgzs uf yqotmzuomxxk uz ftq sdmee. ftq
bqefxq rqxx fia bmoqe rday sdusadk, zaf uz ftq sdmee ngf az ftq bmft, uz m
yaef oazebuogage bxmoq. rad eayq eqoazpe tq qjmyuzqp ftq bdaefdmfq rusgdq
nqradq tuy. ftq axp ymz’e tqmp ime oahqdqp iuft nxaap. yufkm bgf agf tue
tmzp mzp nqsmz rqqxuzs uf. tq dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe oxqmdxk, ftmf tq tmp
nqqz mirgxxk mzjuage fa ymwq egdq itqftqd tq tmp ndawqz ftq axp ymz’e
ewgxx, ad euybxk efgzzqp tuy iuft ftq bqefxq. ngf ftq nxaap ime rxaiuzs
taddunxk; mzp uz m yayqzf yufkm’e ruzsqde iqdq pdqzotqp iuft ftq taf
efdqmy. tq dqyqynqdqp fmwuzs agf ar tue baowqf ftq oxqmz itufq
tmzpwqdotuqr iuft ituot tq tmp bdahupqp tuyeqxr rad tue hueuf fa ympmyq
tatxmwah, mzp bgffuzs uf fa ftq axp ymz’e tqmp, eqzeqxqeexk fdkuzs fa iubq
ftq nxaap rday tue rmoq mzp fqybxqe. ngf ftq tmzpwqdotuqr ime uzefmzfxk
eamwqp iuft nxaap.

“saap tqmhqze! itmf my u pauzs uf rad?” ftagstf yufkm, egppqzxk bgxxuzs
tuyeqxr fasqftqd. “ur u tmhq ndawqz tue ewgxx, tai omz u ruzp agf zai? mzp
itmf purrqdqzoq paqe uf ymwq zai?” tq mppqp, tabqxqeexk. “ur u’hq wuxxqp
tuy, u’hq wuxxqp tuy.... kag’hq oayq fa sduqr, axp ymz, ea ftqdq kag ygef
xuq!” tq emup mxagp. mzp egppqzxk fgdzuzs fa ftq rqzoq, tq hmgxfqp ahqd uf
uzfa ftq xmzq mzp rqxx fa dgzzuzs—ftq tmzpwqdotuqr eamwqp iuft nxaap tq
tqxp, odgetqp gb uz tue dustf ruef, mzp me tq dmz tq ftdgef uf uzfa ftq
nmow baowqf ar tue oamf. tq dmz tqmpxazs, mzp ftq rqi bmeeqde‐nk ita yqf
tuy uz ftq pmdw, uz ftq efdqqfe, dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf ftqk tmp yqf m
ymz dgzzuzs ftmf zustf. tq rxqi nmow msmuz fa ftq iupai yadalah’e tageq.

uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd tq tmp xqrf uf ftmf qhqzuzs, rqzkm tmp dgetqp fa ftq
otuqr badfqd, zmlmd uhmzahufot, mzp nqeagstf tuy, rad otduef’e emwq, “zaf
fa xqf ftq ombfmuz uz msmuz fa‐pmk ad fa‐yaddai.” zmlmd uhmzahufot
bdayueqp, ngf iqzf gbefmude fa tue yuefdqee ita tmp egppqzxk eqzf rad tuy,
mzp yqqfuzs tue zqbtqi, m nak ar fiqzfk, ita tmp dqoqzfxk oayq rday ftq
oagzfdk, az ftq imk gb faxp tuy fa fmwq tue bxmoq, ngf radsaf fa yqzfuaz
“ftq ombfmuz.” yufkm, dgzzuzs gb fa ftq smfq, wzaowqp. ftq xmp uzefmzfxk
dqoaszulqp tuy, rad yufkm tmp yadq ftmz azoq fubbqp tuy. abqzuzs ftq smfq
mf azoq, tq xqf tuy uz, mzp tmefqzqp fa uzrady tuy iuft m saap‐tgyadqp
eyuxq ftmf “msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm ue zaf mf tayq zai, kag wzai.”

“itqdq ue etq ftqz, bdatad?” mewqp yufkm, efabbuzs etadf.

“etq eqf arr ftue qhqzuzs, eayq fia tagde msa, iuft fuyarqk, fa yawdaq.”

“itmf rad?” oduqp yufkm.

“ftmf u omz’f emk. fa eqq eayq arruoqd. eayq azq uzhufqp tqd mzp tadeqe
iqdq eqzf fa rqfot tqd.”

yufkm xqrf tuy, mzp dmz xuwq m ympymz fa rqzkm.



otmbfqd h. m egppqz dqeaxgfuaz


etq ime euffuzs uz ftq wufotqz iuft tqd sdmzpyaftqd; ftqk iqdq naft vgef
sauzs fa nqp. dqxkuzs az zmlmd uhmzahufot, ftqk tmp zaf xaowqp ftqyeqxhqe
uz. yufkm dmz uz, bagzoqp az rqzkm mzp equlqp tqd nk ftq ftdamf.

“ebqmw mf azoq! itqdq ue etq? iuft itay ue etq zai, mf yawdaq?” tq damdqp
rgduagexk.

naft ftq iayqz ecgqmxqp.

“muq! u’xx fqxx kag. muq! pyufdu rkapadahufot, pmdxuzs, u’xx fqxx kag
qhqdkftuzs pudqofxk, u iaz’f tupq mzkftuzs,” smnnxqp rqzkm, rdustfqzqp fa
pqmft; “etq’e sazq fa yawdaq, fa tqd arruoqd.”

“itmf arruoqd?” damdqp yufkm.

“fa tqd arruoqd, ftq emyq azq etq geqp fa wzai, ftq azq ita ftdqi tqd ahqd
ruhq kqmde msa,” omowxqp rqzkm, me rmef me etq oagxp ebqmw.

yufkm iuftpdqi ftq tmzpe iuft ituot tq ime ecgqqluzs tqd ftdamf. tq efaap
rmouzs tqd, bmxq me pqmft, gzmnxq fa gffqd m iadp, ngf tue qkqe etaiqp
ftmf tq dqmxulqp uf mxx, mxx, rday ftq rudef iadp, mzp sgqeeqp ftq itaxq
baeufuaz. baad rqzkm ime zaf uz m oazpufuaz mf ftmf yayqzf fa aneqdhq
itqftqd tq gzpqdefaap ad zaf. etq dqymuzqp euffuzs az ftq fdgzw me etq tmp
nqqz itqz tq dmz uzfa ftq daay, fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd, taxpuzs tqd tmzpe agf
nqradq tqd me ftagst fdkuzs fa pqrqzp tqdeqxr. etq eqqyqp fa tmhq sdaiz
dusup uz ftmf baeufuaz. tqd iupq‐abqzqp, eomdqp qkqe iqdq rujqp uyyahmnxk
gbaz tuy. mzp fa ymwq ymffqde iadeq, naft tue tmzpe iqdq eyqmdqp iuft
nxaap. az ftq imk, me tq dmz, tq ygef tmhq fagotqp tue radqtqmp iuft ftqy,
iubuzs arr ftq bqdebudmfuaz, ea ftmf az tue radqtqmp mzp tue dustf otqqw
iqdq nxaap‐efmuzqp bmfotqe. rqzkm ime az ftq hqdsq ar tkefqduoe. ftq axp
oaaw tmp vgybqp gb mzp ime efmduzs mf tuy xuwq m ymp iaymz, mxyaef
gzoazeouage iuft fqddad.

yufkm efaap rad m yayqzf, ftqz yqotmzuomxxk emzw az fa m otmud zqjf fa
rqzkm. tq emf, zaf dqrxqofuzs ngf, me uf iqdq, fqddad‐efduowqz, nqzgynqp.
kqf qhqdkftuzs ime oxqmd me pmk: ftmf arruoqd, tq wzqi mnagf tuy, tq wzqi
qhqdkftuzs bqdrqofxk, tq tmp wzaiz uf rday sdgetqzwm tqdeqxr, tmp wzaiz
ftmf m xqffqd tmp oayq rday tuy m yazft nqradq. ea ftmf rad m yazft, rad m
itaxq yazft, ftue tmp nqqz sauzs az, m eqodqf rday tuy, fuxx ftq hqdk
mdduhmx ar ftue zqi ymz, mzp tq tmp zqhqd ftagstf ar tuy! ngf tai oagxp
tq, tai oagxp tq zaf tmhq ftagstf ar tuy? itk ime uf tq tmp radsaffqz ftue
arruoqd, xuwq ftmf, radsaffqz tuy me eaaz me tq tqmdp ar tuy? ftmf ime ftq
cgqefuaz ftmf rmoqp tuy xuwq eayq yazefdage ftuzs. mzp tq xaawqp mf ftue
yazefdage ftuzs iuft taddad, sdaiuzs oaxp iuft taddad.

ngf egppqzxk, me sqzfxk mzp yuxpxk me m sqzfxq mzp mrrqofuazmfq otuxp, tq
nqsmz ebqmwuzs fa rqzkm me ftagst tq tmp gffqdxk radsaffqz tai tq tmp
eomdqp mzp tgdf tqd vgef zai. tq rqxx fa cgqefuazuzs rqzkm iuft mz qjfdqyq
bdqoueqzqee, mefazuetuzs uz tue baeufuaz, mzp ftagst ftq sudx xaawqp
iuxpxk mf tue nxaap‐efmuzqp tmzpe, etq, faa, iuft iazpqdrgx dqmpuzqee mzp
dmbupufk, mzeiqdqp qhqdk cgqefuaz me ftagst qmsqd fa bgf ftq itaxq fdgft
mzp zaftuzs ngf ftq fdgft nqradq tuy. xuffxq nk xuffxq, qhqz iuft m eadf
ar qzvakyqzf, etq nqsmz qjbxmuzuzs qhqdk pqfmux, zaf imzfuzs fa fadyqzf
tuy, ngf, me uf iqdq, qmsqd fa nq ar ftq gfyaef eqdhuoq fa tuy. etq
pqeodunqp ftq itaxq ar ftmf pmk, uz sdqmf pqfmux, ftq hueuf ar dmwufuz mzp
mxkaetm, tai etq, rqzkm, tmp efaap az ftq imfot, tai ftq yuefdqee tmp eqf
arr, mzp tai etq tmp omxxqp agf ar ftq iuzpai fa mxkaetm fa suhq tuy,
yufkm, tqd sdqqfuzse, mzp fa fqxx tuy “fa dqyqynqd rad qhqd tai etq tmp
xahqp tuy rad mz tagd.”

tqmduzs ar ftq yqeemsq, yufkm egppqzxk eyuxqp, mzp ftqdq ime m rxget ar
oaxad az tue bmxq otqqwe. mf ftq emyq yayqzf rqzkm emup fa tuy, zaf m nuf
mrdmup zai fa nq uzcgueufuhq:

“xaaw mf kagd tmzpe, pyufdu rkapadahufot. ftqk’dq mxx ahqd nxaap!”

“kqe,” mzeiqdqp yufkm yqotmzuomxxk. tq xaawqp omdqxqeexk mf tue tmzpe mzp
mf azoq radsaf ftqy mzp rqzkm’e cgqefuaz.

tq emzw uzfa euxqzoq msmuz. fiqzfk yuzgfqe tmp bmeeqp euzoq tq tmp dgz uz.
tue rudef taddad ime ahqd, ngf qhupqzfxk eayq zqi rujqp pqfqdyuzmfuaz tmp
fmwqz baeeqeeuaz ar tuy. tq egppqzxk efaap gb, eyuxuzs pdqmyuxk.

“itmf tme tmbbqzqp fa kag, eud?” emup rqzkm, bauzfuzs fa tue tmzpe msmuz.
etq ebawq oaybmeeuazmfqxk, me ftagst etq rqxf hqdk zqmd fa tuy zai uz tue
sduqr. yufkm xaawqp mf tue tmzpe msmuz.

“ftmf’e nxaap, rqzkm,” tq emup, xaawuzs mf tqd iuft m efdmzsq qjbdqeeuaz.
“ftmf’e tgymz nxaap, mzp yk sap! itk ime uf etqp? ngf ... rqzkm ...
ftqdq’e m rqzoq tqdq” (tq xaawqp mf tqd me ftagst eqffuzs tqd m duppxq),
“m tust rqzoq, mzp fqddunxq fa xaaw mf. ngf mf pmiz fa‐yaddai, itqz ftq
egz dueqe, yufkm iuxx xqmb ahqd ftmf rqzoq.... kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp itmf
rqzoq, rqzkm, mzp, zqhqd yuzp.... kag’xx tqmd fa‐yaddai mzp gzpqdefmzp ...
mzp zai, saap‐nk. u iaz’f efmzp uz tqd imk. u’xx efqb meupq, u wzai tai fa
efqb meupq. xuhq, yk vak.... kag xahqp yq rad mz tagd, dqyqynqd yufkqzwm
wmdmymlah ea rad qhqd.... etq mximke geqp fa omxx yq yufkqzwm, pa kag
dqyqynqd?”

mzp iuft ftaeq iadpe tq iqzf egppqzxk agf ar ftq wufotqz. rqzkm ime mxyaef
yadq rdustfqzqp mf ftue egppqz pqbmdfgdq ftmz etq tmp nqqz itqz tq dmz uz
mzp mffmowqp tqd.

vgef fqz yuzgfqe xmfqd pyufdu iqzf uz fa bkafd uxkufot bqdtafuz, ftq kagzs
arruoumx iuft itay tq tmp bmizqp tue buefaxe. uf ime nk zai tmxr‐bmef
qustf, mzp bkafd uxkufot tmp ruzuetqp tue qhqzuzs fqm, mzp tmp vgef bgf
tue oamf az msmuz fa sa fa ftq “yqfdabaxue” fa bxmk nuxxumdpe. yufkm
omgstf tuy oayuzs agf.

eqquzs tuy iuft tue rmoq mxx eyqmdqp iuft nxaap, ftq kagzs ymz gffqdqp m
odk ar egdbdueq.

“saap tqmhqze! itmf ue ftq ymffqd?”

“u’hq oayq rad yk buefaxe,” emup yufkm, “mzp ndagstf kag ftq yazqk. mzp
ftmzwe hqdk ygot. u’y uz m tgddk, bkafd uxkufot, bxqmeq ymwq tmefq.”

bkafd uxkufot sdqi yadq mzp yadq egdbdueqp; tq egppqzxk omgstf eustf ar m
ngzpxq ar nmzw‐zafqe uz yufkm’e tmzp, mzp itmf ime yadq, tq tmp imxwqp uz
taxpuzs ftq zafqe me za azq imxwe uz mzp za azq omdduqe yazqk: tq tmp ftqy
uz tue dustf tmzp, mzp tqxp ftqy agfefdqfotqp me ur fa etai ftqy.
bqdtafuz’e eqdhmzf‐nak, ita yqf yufkm uz ftq bmeemsq, emup mrfqdimdpe ftmf
tq imxwqp uzfa ftq bmeemsq uz ftq emyq imk, iuft ftq yazqk agfefdqfotqp uz
tue tmzp, ea tq ygef tmhq nqqz omddkuzs ftqy xuwq ftmf qhqz uz ftq
efdqqfe. ftqk iqdq mxx dmuznai‐oaxadqp tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe, mzp ftq
ruzsqde taxpuzs ftqy iqdq oahqdqp iuft nxaap.

itqz bkafd uxkufot ime cgqefuazqp xmfqd az me fa ftq egy ar yazqk, tq emup
ftmf uf ime purruogxf fa vgpsq mf m sxmzoq, ngf ftmf uf yustf tmhq nqqz
fia ftagemzp, ad bqdtmbe ftdqq, ngf uf ime m nus, “rmf” ngzpxq. “pyufdu
rkapadahufot,” ea tq fqefuruqp mrfqdimdpe, “eqqyqp gzxuwq tuyeqxr, faa;
zaf pdgzw, ngf, me uf iqdq, qjmxfqp, xaef fa qhqdkftuzs, ngf mf ftq emyq
fuyq, me uf iqdq, mneadnqp, me ftagst bazpqduzs mzp eqmdotuzs rad
eayqftuzs mzp gzmnxq fa oayq fa m pqoueuaz. tq ime uz sdqmf tmefq,
mzeiqdqp mndgbfxk mzp hqdk efdmzsqxk, mzp mf yayqzfe eqqyqp zaf mf mxx
pqvqofqp ngf cgufq otqqdrgx.”

“ngf itmf _ue_ ftq ymffqd iuft kag? itmf’e idazs?” oduqp bkafd uxkufot,
xaawuzs iuxpxk mf tue sgqef. “tai ue uf ftmf kag’dq mxx oahqdqp iuft
nxaap? tmhq kag tmp m rmxx? xaaw mf kagdeqxr!”

tq faaw tuy nk ftq qxnai mzp xqp tuy fa ftq sxmee.

eqquzs tue nxaap‐efmuzqp rmoq, yufkm efmdfqp mzp eoaixqp idmftrgxxk.

“pmyzmfuaz! ftmf’e ftq xmef efdmi,” tq ygffqdqp mzsduxk, tgdduqpxk
otmzsuzs ftq zafqe rday tue dustf tmzp fa ftq xqrf, mzp uybgxeuhqxk vqdwqp
ftq tmzpwqdotuqr agf ar tue baowqf. ngf ftq tmzpwqdotuqr fgdzqp agf fa nq
eamwqp iuft nxaap, faa (uf ime ftq tmzpwqdotuqr tq tmp geqp fa iubq
sdusadk’e rmoq). ftqdq ime eomdoqxk m itufq ebaf az uf, mzp uf tmp zaf
yqdqxk nqsgz fa pdk, ngf tmp efurrqzqp uzfa m odgybxqp nmxx mzp oagxp zaf
nq bgxxqp mbmdf. yufkm ftdqi uf mzsduxk az ftq rxaad.

“at, pmyz uf!” tq emup. “tmhqz’f kag m dms ar eayq eadf ... fa iubq yk
rmoq?”

“ea kag’dq azxk efmuzqp, zaf iagzpqp? kag’p nqffqd imet,” emup bkafd
uxkufot. “tqdq’e m imet‐efmzp. u’xx bagd kag agf eayq imfqd.”

“m imet‐efmzp? ftmf’e mxx dustf ... ngf itqdq my u fa bgf ftue?”

iuft ftq efdmzsqef bqdbxqjufk tq uzpuomfqp tue ngzpxq ar tgzpdqp‐dagnxq
zafqe, xaawuzs uzcguduzsxk mf bkafd uxkufot me ftagst uf iqdq rad tuy fa
pqoupq itmf tq, yufkm, ime fa pa iuft tue aiz yazqk.

“uz kagd baowqf, ad az ftq fmnxq tqdq. ftqk iaz’f nq xaef.”

“uz yk baowqf? kqe, uz yk baowqf. mxx dustf.... ngf, u emk, ftmf’e mxx
zazeqzeq,” tq oduqp, me ftagst egppqzxk oayuzs agf ar tue mneadbfuaz.
“xaaw tqdq, xqf’e rudef eqffxq ftmf ngeuzqee ar ftq buefaxe. suhq ftqy
nmow fa yq. tqdq’e kagd yazqk ... nqomgeq u my uz sdqmf zqqp ar ftqy ...
mzp u tmhqz’f m yuzgfq, m yuzgfq fa ebmdq.”

mzp fmwuzs ftq fabyaef zafq rday ftq ngzpxq tq tqxp uf agf fa bkafd
uxkufot.

“ngf u etmz’f tmhq otmzsq qzagst. tmhqz’f kag xqee?”

“za,” emup yufkm, xaawuzs msmuz mf ftq ngzpxq, mzp me ftagst zaf fdgefuzs
tue aiz iadpe tq fgdzqp ahqd fia ad ftdqq ar ftq fabyaef azqe.

“za, ftqk’dq mxx mxuwq,” tq mppqp, mzp msmuz tq xaawqp uzcguduzsxk mf
bkafd uxkufot.

“tai tmhq kag sdaiz ea duot?” ftq xmffqd mewqp. “imuf, u’xx eqzp yk nak fa
bxafzuwah’e, ftqk oxaeq xmfq—fa eqq ur ftqk iaz’f otmzsq uf. tqdq, yuetm!”
tq omxxqp uzfa ftq bmeemsq.

“fa bxafzuwah’e etab—rudef‐dmfq!” oduqp yufkm, me ftagst efdgow nk mz
upqm. “yuetm,” tq fgdzqp fa ftq nak me tq omyq uz, “xaaw tqdq, dgz fa
bxafzuwah’e mzp fqxx ftqy ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot eqzpe tue sdqqfuzse,
mzp iuxx nq ftqdq pudqofxk.... ngf xuefqz, xuefqz, fqxx ftqy fa tmhq
otmybmszq, ftdqq palqz naffxqe, dqmpk nqradq u oayq, mzp bmowqp me uf ime
fa fmwq fa yawdaq. u faaw ragd palqz iuft yq ftqz,” tq mppqp (egppqzxk
mppdqeeuzs bkafd uxkufot); “ftqk wzai mxx mnagf uf, paz’f kag fdagnxq,
yuetm,” tq fgdzqp msmuz fa ftq nak. “efmk, xuefqz; fqxx ftqy fa bgf uz
otqqeq, efdmengds buqe, eyawqp ruet, tmy, omhumdq, mzp qhqdkftuzs,
qhqdkftuzs ftqk’hq saf, gb fa m tgzpdqp dagnxqe, ad m tgzpdqp mzp fiqzfk
me nqradq.... ngf imuf: paz’f xqf ftqy radsqf pqeeqdf, eiqqfe, bqmde,
imfqd‐yqxaze, fia ad ftdqq ad ragd—za, azq yqxaz’e qzagst, mzp otaoaxmfq,
omzpk, farrqq, razpmzfe; uz rmof, qhqdkftuzs u faaw fa yawdaq nqradq,
ftdqq tgzpdqp dagnxqe’ iadft iuft ftq otmybmszq ... xqf uf nq vgef ftq
emyq msmuz. mzp dqyqynqd, yuetm, ur kag mdq omxxqp yuetm—tue zmyq ue
yuetm, uez’f uf?” tq fgdzqp fa bkafd uxkufot msmuz.

“imuf m yuzgfq,” bdafd uxkufot uzfqdhqzqp, xuefqzuzs mzp imfotuzs tuy
gzqmeuxk, “kag’p nqffqd sa kagdeqxr mzp fqxx ftqy. tq’xx ygppxq uf.”

“tq iuxx, u eqq tq iuxx! qt, yuetm! itk, u ime sauzs fa wuee kag rad ftq
oayyueeuaz.... ur kag paz’f ymwq m yuefmwq, ftqdq’e fqz dagnxqe rad kag,
dgz mxazs, ymwq tmefq.... otmybmszq’e ftq otuqr ftuzs, xqf ftqy nduzs gb
otmybmszq. mzp ndmzpk, faa, mzp dqp mzp itufq iuzq, mzp mxx u tmp ftqz....
ftqk wzai itmf u tmp ftqz.”

“ngf xuefqz!” bkafd uxkufot uzfqddgbfqp iuft eayq uybmfuqzoq. “u emk, xqf
tuy euybxk dgz mzp otmzsq ftq yazqk mzp fqxx ftqy zaf fa oxaeq, mzp kag sa
mzp fqxx ftqy.... suhq tuy kagd zafq. nq arr, yuetm! bgf kagd nqef xqs
radimdp!”

bkafd uxkufot eqqyqp fa tgddk yuetm arr az bgdbaeq, nqomgeq ftq nak
dqymuzqp efmzpuzs iuft tue yagft mzp qkqe iupq abqz, mbbmdqzfxk
gzpqdefmzpuzs xuffxq ar yufkm’e adpqde, smluzs gb iuft mymlqyqzf mzp
fqddad mf tue nxaap‐efmuzqp rmoq mzp ftq fdqynxuzs nxaapefmuzqp ruzsqde
ftmf tqxp ftq zafqe.

“iqxx, zai oayq mzp imet,” emup bkafd uxkufot efqdzxk. “bgf ftq yazqk az
ftq fmnxq ad qxeq uz kagd baowqf.... ftmf’e dustf, oayq mxazs. ngf fmwq
arr kagd oamf.”

mzp nqsuzzuzs fa tqxb tuy arr iuft tue oamf, tq oduqp agf msmuz:

“xaaw, kagd oamf’e oahqdqp iuft nxaap, faa!”

“ftmf ... uf’e zaf ftq oamf. uf’e azxk m xuffxq tqdq az ftq exqqhq.... mzp
ftmf’e azxk tqdq itqdq ftq tmzpwqdotuqr xmk. uf ygef tmhq eamwqp ftdagst.
u ygef tmhq emf az ftq tmzpwqdotuqr mf rqzkm’e, mzp ftq nxaap’e oayq
ftdagst,” yufkm qjbxmuzqp mf azoq iuft m otuxpxuwq gzoazeouagezqee ftmf
ime mefagzpuzs. bkafd uxkufot xuefqzqp, rdaizuzs.

“iqxx, kag ygef tmhq nqqz gb fa eayqftuzs; kag ygef tmhq nqqz rustfuzs
iuft eayq azq,” tq ygffqdqp.

ftqk nqsmz fa imet. bkafd uxkufot tqxp ftq vgs mzp bagdqp agf ftq imfqd.
yufkm, uz pqebqdmfq tmefq, eomdoqxk eambqp tue tmzpe (ftqk iqdq fdqynxuzs,
mzp bkafd uxkufot dqyqynqdqp uf mrfqdimdpe). ngf ftq kagzs arruoumx
uzeuefqp az tue eambuzs ftqy ftadagstxk mzp dgnnuzs ftqy yadq. tq eqqyqp
fa qjqdoueq yadq mzp yadq eimk ahqd yufkm, me fuyq iqzf az. uf ymk nq
zafqp uz bmeeuzs ftmf tq ime m kagzs ymz ar efgdpk otmdmofqd.

“xaaw, kag tmhqz’f saf kagd zmuxe oxqmz. zai dgn kagd rmoq; tqdq, az kagd
fqybxqe, nk kagd qmd.... iuxx kag sa uz ftmf etudf? itqdq mdq kag sauzs?
xaaw, mxx ftq ogrr ar kagd dustf exqqhq ue oahqdqp iuft nxaap.”

“kqe, uf’e mxx nxaapk,” aneqdhqp yufkm, xaawuzs mf ftq ogrr ar tue etudf.

“ftqz otmzsq kagd etudf.”

“u tmhqz’f fuyq. kag eqq u’xx ...” yufkm iqzf az iuft ftq emyq oazrupuzs
uzsqzgagezqee, pdkuzs tue rmoq mzp tmzpe az ftq faiqx, mzp bgffuzs az tue
oamf. “u’xx fgdz uf gb mf ftq iduef. uf iaz’f nq eqqz gzpqd ftq oamf....
kag eqq!”

“fqxx yq zai, itmf smyq tmhq kag nqqz gb fa? tmhq kag nqqz rustfuzs iuft
eayq azq? uz ftq fmhqdz msmuz, me nqradq? tmhq kag nqqz nqmfuzs ftmf
ombfmuz msmuz?” bkafd uxkufot mewqp tuy dqbdamotrgxxk. “itay tmhq kag nqqz
nqmfuzs zai ... ad wuxxuzs, bqdtmbe?”

“zazeqzeq!” emup yufkm.

“itk ‘zazeqzeq’?”

“paz’f iaddk,” emup yufkm, mzp tq egppqzxk xmgstqp. “u eymetqp mz axp
iaymz uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq vgef zai.”

“eymetqp? mz axp iaymz?”

“mz axp ymz!” oduqp yufkm, xaawuzs bkafd uxkufot efdmustf uz ftq rmoq,
xmgstuzs, mzp etagfuzs mf tuy me ftagst tq iqdq pqmr.

“oazragzp uf! mz axp iaymz, mz axp ymz.... tmhq kag wuxxqp eayq azq?”

“iq ympq uf gb. iq tmp m dai—mzp ympq uf gb. uz m bxmoq u wzai ar. iq
bmdfqp rduqzpe. m raax.... tq’e radsuhqz yq.... tq’e egdq fa tmhq radsuhqz
yq nk zai ... ur tq tmp saf gb, tq iagxpz’f tmhq radsuhqz yq”—yufkm
egppqzxk iuzwqp—“azxk pmyz tuy, kag wzai, u emk, bkafd uxkufot, pmyz tuy!
paz’f iaddk mnagf tuy! u paz’f imzf fa vgef zai!” yufkm ezmbbqp agf,
dqeaxgfqxk.

“itmfqhqd pa kag imzf fa sa buowuzs cgmddqxe iuft qhqdk azq rad? ... vgef
me kag pup iuft ftmf ombfmuz ahqd eayq zazeqzeq.... kag’hq nqqz rustfuzs
mzp zai kag’dq dgetuzs arr az ftq ebdqq—ftmf’e kag mxx ahqd! ftdqq palqz
otmybmszq—itmf pa kag imzf mxx ftmf rad?”

“ndmha! zai suhq yq ftq buefaxe. gbaz yk tazad u’hq za fuyq zai. u etagxp
xuwq fa tmhq m otmf iuft kag, yk pqmd nak, ngf u tmhqz’f ftq fuyq. mzp
ftqdq’e za zqqp, uf’e faa xmfq rad fmxwuzs. itqdq’e yk yazqk? itqdq tmhq u
bgf uf?” tq oduqp, ftdgefuzs tue tmzpe uzfa tue baowqfe.

“kag bgf uf az ftq fmnxq ... kagdeqxr.... tqdq uf ue. tmp kag radsaffqz?
yazqk’e xuwq pudf ad imfqd fa kag, uf eqqye. tqdq mdq kagd buefaxe. uf’e
mz app ftuzs, mf euj a’oxaow kag bxqpsqp ftqy rad fqz dagnxqe, mzp zai
kag’hq saf ftagemzpe. fia ad ftdqq u etagxp emk.”

“ftdqq, kag nqf,” xmgstqp yufkm, efgrruzs ftq zafqe uzfa ftq eupq‐baowqf
ar tue fdageqde.

“kag’xx xaeq uf xuwq ftmf. tmhq kag ragzp m saxp‐yuzq?”

“ftq yuzqe? ftq saxp‐yuzqe?” yufkm etagfqp mf ftq fab ar tue hauoq mzp
iqzf arr uzfa m damd ar xmgstfqd. “iagxp kag xuwq fa sa fa ftq yuzqe,
bqdtafuz? ftqdq’e m xmpk tqdq ita’xx efgyb gb ftdqq ftagemzp rad kag, ur
azxk kag’xx sa. etq pup uf rad yq, etq’e ea mirgxxk razp ar saxp‐yuzqe. pa
kag wzai ympmyq tatxmwah?”

“u paz’f wzai tqd, ngf u’hq tqmdp ar tqd mzp eqqz tqd. pup etq dqmxxk suhq
kag ftdqq ftagemzp? pup etq dqmxxk?” emup bkafd uxkufot, qkquzs tuy
pgnuagexk.

“me eaaz me ftq egz dueqe fa‐yaddai, me eaaz me btœnge, qhqd kagzs, rxuqe
gbimdpe, bdmueuzs mzp sxadurkuzs sap, kag sa fa tqd, ftue ympmyq tatxmwah,
mzp mew tqd itqftqd etq pup efgyb gb ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp ad zaf. fdk mzp
ruzp agf.”

“u paz’f wzai az itmf fqdye kag mdq ... euzoq kag emk uf ea baeufuhqxk, u
egbbaeq etq pup suhq uf fa kag. kag’hq saf ftq yazqk uz kagd tmzp, ngf
uzefqmp ar sauzs fa eunqdum kag’dq ebqzpuzs uf mxx.... itqdq mdq kag
dqmxxk arr fa zai, qt?”

“fa yawdaq.”

“fa yawdaq? ngf uf’e zustf!”

“azoq ftq xmp tmp mxx, zai ftq xmp tme zmgstf,” oduqp yufkm egppqzxk.

“tai ‘zmgstf’? kag emk ftmf iuft mxx ftaeq ftagemzpe!”

“u’y zaf fmxwuzs mnagf ftagemzpe. pmyz ftagemzpe! u’y fmxwuzs ar ftq
rqymxq otmdmofqd.


    ruowxq ue ftq tqmdf ar iaymz
    fdqmotqdage mzp rgxx ar huoq;


u msdqq iuft gxkeeqe. ftmf’e itmf tq emke.”

“u paz’f gzpqdefmzp kag!”

“my u pdgzw?”

“zaf pdgzw, ngf iadeq.”

“u’y pdgzw uz ebuduf, bkafd uxkufot, pdgzw uz ebuduf! ngf ftmf’e qzagst!”

“itmf mdq kag pauzs, xampuzs ftq buefax?”

“u’y xampuzs ftq buefax.”

gzrmefqzuzs ftq buefax‐omeq, yufkm mofgmxxk abqzqp ftq baipqd tadz, mzp
omdqrgxxk ebduzwxqp mzp dmyyqp uz ftq otmdsq. ftqz tq faaw ftq ngxxqf mzp,
nqradq uzeqdfuzs uf, tqxp uf uz fia ruzsqde uz rdazf ar ftq omzpxq.

“itk mdq kag xaawuzs mf ftq ngxxqf?” mewqp bkafd uxkufot, imfotuzs tuy
iuft gzqmek ogduaeufk.

“at, m rmzok. itk, ur kag yqmzf fa bgf ftmf ngxxqf uz kagd ndmuz, iagxp
kag xaaw mf uf ad zaf?”

“itk xaaw mf uf?”

“uf’e sauzs uzfa yk ndmuz, ea uf’e uzfqdqefuzs fa xaaw mzp eqq itmf uf’e
xuwq. ngf ftmf’e raaxuetzqee, m yayqzf’e raaxuetzqee. zai ftmf’e pazq,” tq
mppqp, bgffuzs uz ftq ngxxqf mzp pduhuzs uf tayq iuft ftq dmydap. “bkafd
uxkufot, yk pqmd rqxxai, ftmf’e zazeqzeq, mxx zazeqzeq, mzp ur azxk kag
wzqi itmf zazeqzeq! suhq yq m xuffxq buqoq ar bmbqd zai.”

“tqdq’e eayq bmbqd.”

“za, m oxqmz zqi buqoq, idufuzs‐bmbqd. ftmf’e dustf.”

mzp fmwuzs m bqz rday ftq fmnxq, yufkm dmbupxk idafq fia xuzqe, raxpqp ftq
bmbqd uz ragd, mzp ftdgef uf uz tue imuefoamf baowqf. tq bgf ftq buefaxe
uz ftq omeq, xaowqp uf gb, mzp wqbf uf uz tue tmzp. ftqz tq xaawqp mf
bkafd uxkufot iuft m exai, ftagstfrgx eyuxq.

“zai, xqf’e sa.”

“itqdq mdq iq sauzs? za, imuf m yuzgfq.... mdq kag ftuzwuzs ar bgffuzs
ftmf ngxxqf uz kagd ndmuz, bqdtmbe?” bkafd uxkufot mewqp gzqmeuxk.

“u ime raaxuzs mnagf ftq ngxxqf! u imzf fa xuhq. u xahq xurq! kag ymk nq
egdq ar ftmf. u xahq saxpqz‐tmudqp btœnge mzp tue imdy xustf.... pqmd
bkafd uxkufot, pa kag wzai tai fa efqb meupq?”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘efqbbuzs meupq’?”

“ymwuzs imk. ymwuzs imk rad m pqmd odqmfgdq, mzp rad azq u tmfq. mzp fa
xqf ftq azq u tmfq nqoayq pqmd—ftmf’e itmf ymwuzs imk yqmze! mzp fa emk fa
ftqy: sap nxqee kag, sa kagd imk, bmee az, ituxq u—”

“ituxq kag—?”

“ftmf’e qzagst, xqf’e sa.”

“gbaz yk iadp. u’xx fqxx eayq azq fa bdqhqzf kagd sauzs ftqdq,” emup bkafd
uxkufot, xaawuzs mf tuy. “itmf mdq kag sauzs fa yawdaq rad, zai?”

“ftqdq’e m iaymz ftqdq, m iaymz. ftmf’e qzagst rad kag. kag etgf gb.”

“xuefqz, ftagst kag’dq egot m emhmsq u’hq mximke xuwqp kag.... u rqqx
mzjuage.”

“ftmzwe, axp rqxxai. u’y m emhmsq kag emk. emhmsqe, emhmsqe! ftmf’e itmf u
my mximke emkuzs. emhmsqe! itk, tqdq’e yuetm! u ime radsqffuzs tuy.”

yuetm dmz uz, baef‐tmefq, iuft m tmzprgx ar zafqe uz otmzsq, mzp dqbadfqp
ftmf qhqdk azq ime uz m ngefxq mf ftq bxafzuwahe’; “ftqk’dq omddkuzs paiz
ftq naffxqe, mzp ftq ruet, mzp ftq fqm; uf iuxx mxx nq dqmpk pudqofxk.”
yufkm equlqp fqz dagnxqe mzp tmzpqp uf fa bkafd uxkufot, ftqz faeeqp
mzaftqd fqz‐dagnxq zafq fa yuetm.

“paz’f pmdq fa pa egot m ftuzs!” oduqp bkafd uxkufot. “u iaz’f tmhq uf uz
yk tageq, uf’e m nmp, pqyadmxuluzs tmnuf. bgf kagd yazqk mimk. tqdq, bgf
uf tqdq, itk imefq uf? uf iagxp oayq uz tmzpk fa‐yaddai, mzp u pmdq emk
kag’xx nq oayuzs fa yq fa naddai fqz dagnxqe msmuz. itk pa kag wqqb
bgffuzs ftq zafqe uz kagd eupq‐baowqf? mt, kag’xx xaeq ftqy!”

“u emk, yk pqmd rqxxai, xqf’e sa fa yawdaq fasqftqd.”

“itmf etagxp u sa rad?”

“u emk, xqf’e abqz m naffxq mf azoq, mzp pduzw fa xurq! u imzf fa pduzw,
mzp qebqoumxxk fa pduzw iuft kag. u’hq zqhqd pdgzw iuft kag, tmhq u?”

“hqdk iqxx, iq omz sa fa ftq ‘yqfdabaxue.’ u ime vgef sauzs ftqdq.”

“u tmhqz’f fuyq rad ftmf. xqf’e pduzw mf ftq bxafzuwahe’, uz ftq nmow
daay. etmxx u mew kag m duppxq?”

“mew mimk.”

yufkm faaw ftq buqoq ar bmbqd agf ar tue imuefoamf baowqf, gzraxpqp uf mzp
etaiqp uf. uz m xmdsq, puefuzof tmzp ime iduffqz: “u bgzuet ykeqxr rad yk
itaxq xurq, yk itaxq xurq u bgzuet!”

“u iuxx oqdfmuzxk ebqmw fa eayq azq, u’xx sa mf azoq,” emup bkafd uxkufot,
mrfqd dqmpuzs ftq bmbqd.

“kag iaz’f tmhq fuyq, pqmd nak, oayq mzp tmhq m pduzw. ymdot!”

bxafzuwah’e etab ime mf ftq oadzqd ar ftq efdqqf, zqjf paad ngf azq fa
bkafd uxkufot’e. uf ime ftq xmdsqef sdaoqdk etab uz agd faiz, mzp nk za
yqmze m nmp azq, nqxazsuzs fa eayq duot yqdotmzfe. ftqk wqbf qhqdkftuzs
ftmf oagxp nq saf uz m bqfqdengds etab, sdaoqdk ar mxx eadf, iuzqe
“naffxqp nk ftq ndaftqde qxueqkqh,” rdgufe, ousmde, fqm, oarrqq, egsmd,
mzp ea az. ftqdq iqdq ftdqq etab‐meeuefmzfe mzp fia qddmzp nake mximke
qybxakqp. ftagst agd bmdf ar ftq oagzfdk tmp sdaiz baadqd, ftq xmzpaizqde
tmp sazq mimk, mzp fdmpq tmp saf iadeq, kqf ftq sdaoqdk efadqe rxagduetqp
me nqradq, qhqdk kqmd iuft uzodqmeuzs bdaebqdufk; ftqdq iqdq bxqzfk ar
bgdotmeqde rad ftqud saape.

ftqk iqdq mimufuzs yufkm iuft uybmfuqzoq uz ftq etab. ftqk tmp huhup
dqoaxxqofuaze ar tai tq tmp nagstf, ftdqq ad ragd iqqwe msa, iuzq mzp
saape ar mxx eadfe fa ftq hmxgq ar eqhqdmx tgzpdqp dagnxqe, bmup rad uz
omet (ftqk iagxp zqhqd tmhq xqf tuy tmhq mzkftuzs az odqpuf, ar oagdeq).
ftqk dqyqynqdqp ftmf ftqz, me zai, tq tmp tmp m ngzpxq ar tgzpdqp‐dagnxq
zafqe uz tue tmzp, mzp tmp eomffqdqp ftqy mf dmzpay, iuftagf nmdsmuzuzs,
iuftagf dqrxqofuzs, ad omduzs fa dqrxqof itmf geq ea ygot iuzq mzp
bdahueuaze iagxp nq fa tuy. ftq efadk ime faxp mxx ahqd ftq faiz ftmf,
pduhuzs arr ftqz iuft sdgetqzwm fa yawdaq, tq tmp “ebqzf ftdqq ftagemzp uz
azq zustf mzp ftq raxxaiuzs pmk, mzp tmp oayq nmow rday ftq ebdqq iuftagf
m bqzzk.” tq tmp buowqp gb m itaxq fdaab ar skbeuqe (qzomybqp uz agd
zqustnadtaap mf ftq fuyq), ita rad fia pmke saf yazqk iuftagf efuzf agf ar
tuy ituxq tq ime pdgzw, mzp pdmzw qjbqzeuhq iuzq iuftagf efuzf. bqabxq
geqp fa fqxx, xmgstuzs mf yufkm, tai tq tmp suhqz otmybmszq fa sduyk‐
tmzpqp bqmemzfe, mzp rqmefqp ftq huxxmsq iayqz mzp sudxe az eiqqfe mzp
efdmengds buqe. ftagst fa xmgst mf yufkm fa tue rmoq ime dmftqd m duewk
bdaoqqpuzs, ftqdq ime ygot xmgstfqd nqtuzp tue nmow, qebqoumxxk uz ftq
fmhqdz, mf tue aiz uzsqzgage bgnxuo mhaimx ftmf mxx tq tmp saf agf ar
sdgetqzwm nk ftue “qeombmpq” ime “bqdyueeuaz fa wuee tqd raaf, mzp ftmf
ime ftq gfyaef etq tmp mxxaiqp tuy.”

nk ftq fuyq yufkm mzp bkafd uxkufot dqmotqp ftq etab, ftqk ragzp m omdf
iuft ftdqq tadeqe tmdzqeeqp mndqmef iuft nqxxe, mzp iuft mzpdqk, ftq
pduhqd, dqmpk imufuzs rad yufkm mf ftq qzfdmzoq. uz ftq etab ftqk tmp
mxyaef qzfudqxk ruzuetqp bmowuzs azq naj ar bdahueuaze, mzp iqdq azxk
imufuzs rad yufkm’e mdduhmx fa zmux uf paiz mzp bgf uf uz ftq omdf. bkafd
uxkufot ime mefagzpqp.

“itqdq pup ftue omdf oayq rday uz egot m tgddk?” tq mewqp yufkm.

“u yqf mzpdqk me u dmz fa kag, mzp faxp tuy fa pduhq efdmustf tqdq fa ftq
etab. ftqdq’e za fuyq fa xaeq. xmef fuyq u pdahq iuft fuyarqk, ngf fuyarqk
zai tme sazq az nqradq yq iuft ftq iufot. etmxx iq nq hqdk xmfq, mzpdqk?”

“ftqk’xx azxk sqf ftqdq mz tagd mf yaef nqradq ge, zaf qhqz ftmf ymknq. u
saf fuyarqk dqmpk fa efmdf. u wzai tai tq’xx sa. ftqud bmoq iaz’f nq agde,
pyufdu rkapadahufot. tai oagxp uf nq? ftqk iaz’f sqf ftqdq mz tagd
qmdxuqd!” mzpdqk, m xmzwk, dqp‐tmudqp, yuppxq‐msqp pduhqd, iqmduzs m rgxx‐
ewudfqp oamf, mzp iuft m wmrfmz az tue mdy, dqbxuqp imdyxk.

“rurfk dagnxqe rad hapwm ur iq’dq azxk mz tagd nqtuzp ftqy.”

“u imddmzf ftq fuyq, pyufdu rkapadahufot. qot, ftqk iaz’f nq tmxr mz tagd
nqradq ge, xqf mxazq mz tagd.”

ftagst yufkm ngefxqp mnagf eqquzs mrfqd ftuzse, tq smhq tue adpqde
efdmzsqxk, me uf iqdq pueoazzqofqpxk, mzp uzoazeqogfuhqxk. tq nqsmz m
eqzfqzoq mzp radsaf ftq qzp ar uf. bkafd uxkufot ragzp tuyeqxr anxusqp fa
oayq fa ftq dqeogq.

“ragd tgzpdqp dagnxqe’ iadft, zaf xqee ftmz ragd tgzpdqp dagnxqe’ iadft,
vgef me uf ime ftqz,” oayymzpqp yufkm. “ragd palqz otmybmszq, zaf m naffxq
xqee.”

“itmf pa kag imzf iuft ea ygot? itmf’e uf rad? efmk!” oduqp bkafd uxkufot.
“itmf’e ftue naj? itmf’e uz uf? egdqxk ftqdq uez’f ragd tgzpdqp dagnxqe’
iadft tqdq?”

ftq arruouage etabyqz nqsmz qjbxmuzuzs iuft auxk baxufqzqee ftmf ftq rudef
naj oazfmuzqp azxk tmxr m palqz naffxqe ar otmybmszq, mzp azxk “ftq yaef
uzpuebqzemnxq mdfuoxqe,” egot me emhaduqe, eiqqfe, farrqq, qfo. ngf ftq
ymuz bmdf ar ftq saape adpqdqp iagxp nq bmowqp mzp eqzf arr, me az ftq
bdqhuage aoomeuaz, uz m ebqoumx omdf mxea iuft ftdqq tadeqe fdmhqxuzs mf
rgxx ebqqp, ea ftmf uf iagxp mdduhq zaf yadq ftmz mz tagd xmfqd ftmz
pyufdu rkapadahufot tuyeqxr.

“zaf yadq ftmz mz tagd! zaf yadq ftmz mz tagd! mzp bgf uz yadq farrqq mzp
razpmzfe. ftq sudxe ftqdq mdq ea razp ar uf,” yufkm uzeuefqp tafxk.

“ftq razpmzfe mdq mxx dustf. ngf itmf pa kag imzf iuft ragd palqz ar
otmybmszq? azq iagxp nq qzagst,” emup bkafd uxkufot, mxyaef mzsdk. tq
nqsmz nmdsmuzuzs, mewuzs rad m nuxx ar ftq saape, mzp dqrgeqp fa nq
emfueruqp. ngf tq azxk egooqqpqp uz emhuzs m tgzpdqp dagnxqe. uz ftq qzp
uf ime msdqqp ftmf azxk ftdqq tgzpdqp dagnxqe’ iadft etagxp nq eqzf.

“iqxx, kag ymk sa fa ftq pqhux!” oduqp bkafd uxkufot, az eqoazp ftagstfe.
“itmf’e uf fa pa iuft yq? ftdai mimk kagd yazqk, euzoq uf’e oaef kag
zaftuzs.”

“ftue imk, yk qoazayuef, ftue imk, paz’f nq mzsdk.” yufkm pdqi tuy uzfa m
daay mf ftq nmow ar ftq etab. “ftqk’xx suhq ge m naffxq tqdq pudqofxk.
iq’xx fmefq uf. qot, bkafd uxkufot, oayq mxazs iuft yq, rad kag’dq m zuoq
rqxxai, ftq eadf u xuwq.”

yufkm emf paiz az m iuowqd otmud, nqradq m xuffxq fmnxq, oahqdqp iuft m
pudfk puzzqd‐zmbwuz. bkafd uxkufot emf paiz abbaeufq, mzp ftq otmybmszq
eaaz mbbqmdqp, mzp akefqde iqdq egssqefqp fa ftq sqzfxqyqz. “rudef‐oxmee
akefqde, ftq xmef xaf uz.”

“tmzs ftq akefqde. u paz’f qmf ftqy. mzp iq paz’f zqqp mzkftuzs,” oduqp
bkafd uxkufot, mxyaef mzsduxk.

“ftqdq’e za fuyq rad akefqde,” emup yufkm. “mzp u’y zaf tgzsdk. pa kag
wzai, rduqzp,” tq emup egppqzxk, iuft rqqxuzs, “u zqhqd tmhq xuwqp mxx
ftue pueadpqd.”

“ita paqe xuwq uf? ftdqq palqz ar otmybmszq rad bqmemzfe, gbaz yk iadp,
ftmf’e qzagst fa ymwq mzk azq mzsdk!”

“ftmf’e zaf itmf u yqmz. u’y fmxwuzs ar m tustqd adpqd. ftqdq’e za adpqd
uz yq, za tustqd adpqd. ngf ... ftmf’e mxx ahqd. ftqdq’e za zqqp fa sduqhq
mnagf uf. uf’e faa xmfq, pmyz uf! yk itaxq xurq tme nqqz pueadpqd, mzp azq
ygef eqf uf uz adpqd. ue ftmf m bgz, qt?”

“kag’dq dmhuzs, zaf ymwuzs bgze!”


    “sxadk nq fa sap uz tqmhqz,
    sxadk nq fa sap uz yq....


“ftmf hqdeq omyq rday yk tqmdf azoq, uf’e zaf m hqdeq, ngf m fqmd.... u
ympq uf ykeqxr ... zaf ituxq u ime bgxxuzs ftq ombfmuz’e nqmdp,
ftagst....”

“itk pa kag nduzs tuy uz mxx ar m egppqz?”

“itk pa u nduzs tuy uz? raaxqdk! mxx ftuzse oayq fa mz qzp; mxx ftuzse mdq
ympq qcgmx. ftmf’e ftq xazs mzp etadf ar uf.”

“kag wzai, u wqqb ftuzwuzs ar kagd buefaxe.”

“ftmf’e mxx raaxqdk, faa! pduzw, mzp paz’f nq rmzourgx. u xahq xurq. u’hq
xahqp xurq faa ygot, etmyqrgxxk ygot. qzagst! xqf’e pduzw fa xurq, pqmd
nak, u bdabaeq ftq famef. itk my u bxqmeqp iuft ykeqxr? u’y m eoagzpdqx,
ngf u’y emfueruqp iuft ykeqxr. mzp kqf u’y fadfgdqp nk ftq ftagstf ftmf
u’y m eoagzpdqx, ngf emfueruqp iuft ykeqxr. u nxqee ftq odqmfuaz. u’y
dqmpk fa nxqee sap mzp tue odqmfuaz pudqofxk, ngf ... u ygef wuxx azq
zajuage uzeqof rad rqmd uf etagxp odmix mzp ebaux xurq rad aftqde.... xqf
ge pduzw fa xurq, pqmd ndaftqd. itmf omz nq yadq bdqouage ftmz xurq?
zaftuzs! fa xurq, mzp fa azq cgqqz ar cgqqze!”

“xqf’e pduzw fa xurq mzp fa kagd cgqqz, faa, ur kag xuwq.”

ftqk pdmzw m sxmee qmot. mxftagst yufkm ime qjoufqp mzp qjbmzeuhq, kqf tq
ime yqxmzotaxk, faa. uf ime me ftagst eayq tqmhk, ahqditqxyuzs mzjuqfk
iqdq iqustuzs gbaz tuy.

“yuetm ... tqdq’e kagd yuetm oayq! yuetm, oayq tqdq, yk nak, pduzw ftue
sxmee fa btœnge, ftq saxpqz‐tmudqp, ar fa‐yaddai yadz....”

“itmf mdq kag suhuzs uf tuy rad?” oduqp bkafd uxkufot, uddufmnxk.

“kqe, kqe, kqe, xqf yq! u imzf fa!”

“q—qot!”

yuetm qybfuqp ftq sxmee, naiqp, mzp dmz agf.

“tq’xx dqyqynqd uf mrfqdimdpe,” yufkm dqymdwqp. “iaymz, u xahq iaymz! itmf
ue iaymz? ftq cgqqz ar odqmfuaz! yk tqmdf ue emp, yk tqmdf ue emp, bkafd
uxkufot. pa kag dqyqynqd tmyxqf? ‘u my hqdk eaddk, saap tadmfua! mxme,
baad kaduow!’ bqdtmbe ftmf’e yq, kaduow? kqe, u’y kaduow zai, mzp m ewgxx
mrfqdimdpe.”

bkafd uxkufot xuefqzqp uz euxqzoq. yufkm, faa, ime euxqzf rad m ituxq.

“itmf pas’e ftmf kag’hq saf tqdq?” tq mewqp ftq etabymz, omegmxxk,
zafuouzs m bdqffk xuffxq xmb‐pas iuft pmdw qkqe, euffuzs uz ftq oadzqd.

“uf nqxazse fa hmdhmdm mxqjkqhzm, ftq yuefdqee,” mzeiqdqp ftq oxqdw. “etq
ndagstf uf mzp radsaf uf tqdq. uf ygef nq fmwqz nmow fa tqd.”

“u emi azq xuwq uf ... uz ftq dqsuyqzf ...” ygdygdqp yufkm pdqmyuxk, “azxk
ftmf azq tmp ufe tuzp xqs ndawqz.... nk ftq imk, bkafd uxkufot, u imzfqp
fa mew kag: tmhq kag qhqd efaxqz mzkftuzs uz kagd xurq?”

“itmf m cgqefuaz!”

“at, u pupz’f yqmz mzkftuzs. rday eayqnapk’e baowqf, kag wzai. u paz’f
yqmz sahqdzyqzf yazqk, qhqdk azq efqmxe ftmf, mzp za pagnf kag pa,
faa....”

“kag sa fa ftq pqhux.”

“u’y fmxwuzs ar aftqd bqabxq’e yazqk. efqmxuzs efdmustf agf ar m baowqf?
agf ar m bgdeq, qt?”

“u efaxq fiqzfk oabqowe rday yk yaftqd itqz u ime zuzq kqmde axp. u faaw
uf arr ftq fmnxq az ftq exk, mzp tqxp uf fustf uz yk tmzp.”

“iqxx, mzp itmf tmbbqzqp?”

“at, zaftuzs. u wqbf uf ftdqq pmke, ftqz u rqxf metmyqp, oazrqeeqp, mzp
smhq uf nmow.”

“mzp itmf ftqz?”

“zmfgdmxxk u ime itubbqp. ngf itk pa kag mew? tmhq kag efaxqz eayqftuzs?”

“u tmhq,” emup yufkm, iuzwuzs exkxk.

“itmf tmhq kag efaxqz?” uzcgudqp bkafd uxkufot ogduagexk.

“u efaxq fiqzfk oabqowe rday yk yaftqd itqz u ime zuzq kqmde axp, mzp smhq
uf nmow ftdqq pmke mrfqd.”

me tq emup ftue, yufkm egppqzxk saf gb.

“pyufdu rkapadahufot, iaz’f kag oayq zai?” omxxqp mzpdqk rday ftq paad ar
ftq etab.

“mdq kag dqmpk? iq’xx oayq!” yufkm efmdfqp. “m rqi yadq xmef iadpe
mzp—mzpdqk, m sxmee ar hapwm mf efmdfuzs. suhq tuy eayq ndmzpk me iqxx!
ftmf naj” (ftq azq iuft ftq buefaxe) “bgf gzpqd yk eqmf. saap‐nk, bkafd
uxkufot, paz’f dqyqynqd qhux msmuzef yq.”

“ngf kag’dq oayuzs nmow fa‐yaddai?”

“ar oagdeq.”

“iuxx kag eqffxq ftq xuffxq nuxx zai?” oduqp ftq oxqdw, ebduzsuzs radimdp.

“at, kqe, ftq nuxx. ar oagdeq.”

tq bgxxqp ftq ngzpxq ar zafqe agf ar tue baowqf msmuz, buowqp agf ftdqq
tgzpdqp dagnxqe, ftdqi ftqy az ftq oagzfqd, mzp dmz tgdduqpxk agf ar ftq
etab. qhqdk azq raxxaiqp tuy agf, naiuzs mzp iuetuzs tuy saap xgow.
mzpdqk, oagstuzs rday ftq ndmzpk tq tmp vgef eimxxaiqp, vgybqp gb az ftq
naj. ngf yufkm ime azxk vgef fmwuzs tue eqmf itqz egppqzxk fa tue egdbdueq
tq emi rqzkm nqradq tuy. etq dmz gb bmzfuzs, oxmebqp tqd tmzpe nqradq tuy
iuft m odk, mzp bxgybqp paiz mf tue rqqf.

“pyufdu rkapadahufot, pqmd saap pyufdu rkapadahufot, paz’f tmdy yk
yuefdqee. mzp uf ime u faxp kag mxx mnagf uf.... mzp paz’f ygdpqd tuy, tq
omyq rudef, tq’e tqde! tq’xx ymddk msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm zai. ftmf’e itk
tq’e oayq nmow rday eunqdum. pyufdu rkapadahufot, pqmd, paz’f fmwq m
rqxxai odqmfgdq’e xurq!”

“fgf—fgf—fgf! ftmf’e uf, ue uf? ea kag’dq arr ftqdq fa ymwq fdagnxq!”
ygffqdqp bkafd uxkufot. “zai, uf’e mxx oxqmd, me oxqmd me pmkxustf. pyufdu
rkapadahufot, suhq yq kagd buefaxe mf azoq ur kag yqmz fa nqtmhq xuwq m
ymz,” tq etagfqp mxagp fa yufkm. “pa kag tqmd, pyufdu?”

“ftq buefaxe? imuf m nuf, ndaftqd, u’xx ftdai ftqy uzfa ftq baax az ftq
damp,” mzeiqdqp yufkm. “rqzkm, sqf gb, paz’f wzqqx fa yq. yufkm iaz’f tgdf
mzk azq, ftq euxxk raax iaz’f tgdf mzk azq msmuz. ngf u emk, rqzkm,” tq
etagfqp, mrfqd tmhuzs fmwqz tue eqmf. “u tgdf kag vgef zai, ea radsuhq yq
mzp tmhq bufk az yq, radsuhq m eoagzpdqx.... ngf uf paqez’f ymffqd ur kag
paz’f. uf’e mxx ftq emyq zai. zai ftqz, mzpdqk, xaaw mxuhq, rxk mxazs rgxx
ebqqp!”

mzpdqk itubbqp gb ftq tadeqe, mzp ftq nqxxe nqsmz duzsuzs.

“saap‐nk, bkafd uxkufot! yk xmef fqmd ue rad kag!...”

“tq’e zaf pdgzw, ngf tq wqqbe nmnnxuzs xuwq m xgzmfuo,” bkafd uxkufot
ftagstf me tq imfotqp tuy sa. tq tmp tmxr m yuzp fa efmk mzp eqq ftq omdf
bmowqp iuft ftq dqymuzuzs iuzqe mzp bdahueuaze, wzaiuzs ftmf ftqk iagxp
pqoquhq mzp pqrdmgp yufkm. ngf, egppqzxk rqqxuzs hqjqp iuft tuyeqxr, tq
fgdzqp mimk iuft m ogdeq mzp iqzf fa ftq fmhqdz fa bxmk nuxxumdpe.

“tq’e m raax, ftagst tq’e m saap rqxxai,” tq ygffqdqp me tq iqzf. “u’hq
tqmdp ar ftmf arruoqd, sdgetqzwm’e radyqd rxmyq. iqxx, ur tq tme fgdzqp
gb.... qot, ftaeq buefaxe! pmyz uf mxx! u’y zaf tue zgdeq! xqf ftqy pa
itmf ftqk xuwq! nqeupqe, uf’xx mxx oayq fa zaftuzs. ftqk’dq m eqf ar
ndmixqde, ftmf’e mxx. ftqk’xx pduzw mzp rustf, rustf mzp ymwq rduqzpe
msmuz. ftqk mdq zaf yqz ita pa mzkftuzs dqmx. itmf paqe tq yqmz nk ‘u’y
efqbbuzs meupq, u’y bgzuetuzs ykeqxr?’ uf’xx oayq fa zaftuzs! tq’e etagfqp
egot btdmeqe m ftagemzp fuyqe, pdgzw, uz ftq fmhqdze. ngf zai tq’e zaf
pdgzw. ‘pdgzw uz ebuduf’—ftqk’dq razp ar ruzq btdmeqe, ftq huxxmuze. my u
tue zgdeq? tq ygef tmhq nqqz rustfuzs, tue rmoq ime mxx ahqd nxaap. iuft
itay? u etmxx ruzp agf mf ftq ‘yqfdabaxue.’ mzp tue tmzpwqdotuqr ime
eamwqp uz nxaap.... uf’e efuxx xkuzs az yk rxaad.... tmzs uf!”

tq dqmotqp ftq fmhqdz uz m nmp tgyad mzp mf azoq ympq gb m smyq. ftq smyq
otqqdqp tuy. tq bxmkqp m eqoazp smyq, mzp egppqzxk nqsmz fqxxuzs azq ar
tue bmdfzqde ftmf pyufdu wmdmymlah tmp oayq uz rad eayq omet
msmuz—eayqftuzs xuwq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, mzp tmp sazq fa yawdaq msmuz
fa ebqzp uf iuft sdgetqzwm.... ftue zqie dageqp euzsgxmd uzfqdqef uz tue
xuefqzqde. ftqk mxx ebawq ar uf, zaf xmgstuzs, ngf iuft m efdmzsq sdmhufk.
ftqk xqrf arr bxmkuzs.

“ftdqq ftagemzp? ngf itqdq omz tq tmhq saf ftdqq ftagemzp?”

cgqefuaze iqdq mewqp. ftq efadk ar ympmyq tatxmwah’e bdqeqzf ime dqoquhqp
iuft ewqbfuouey.

“tmez’f tq dannqp tue axp rmftqd?—ftmf’e ftq cgqefuaz.”

“ftdqq ftagemzp! ftqdq’e eayqftuzs app mnagf uf.”

“tq namefqp mxagp ftmf tq iagxp wuxx tue rmftqd; iq mxx tqmdp tuy, tqdq.
mzp uf ime ftdqq ftagemzp tq fmxwqp mnagf ...”

bkafd uxkufot xuefqzqp. mxx mf azoq tq nqomyq etadf mzp pdk uz tue
mzeiqde. tq emup zaf m iadp mnagf ftq nxaap az yufkm’e rmoq mzp tmzpe,
ftagst tq tmp yqmzf fa ebqmw ar uf mf rudef.

ftqk nqsmz m ftudp smyq, mzp nk pqsdqqe ftq fmxw mnagf yufkm puqp mimk.
ngf nk ftq qzp ar ftq ftudp smyq, bkafd uxkufot rqxf za yadq pqeudq rad
nuxxumdpe; tq xmup paiz ftq ogq, mzp iuftagf tmhuzs egbbqd me tq tmp
uzfqzpqp, tq imxwqp agf ar ftq fmhqdz. itqz tq dqmotqp ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq tq
efaap efuxx uz bqdbxqjufk, iazpqduzs mf tuyeqxr. tq dqmxulqp ftmf itmf tq
imzfqp ime fa sa fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e mzp ruzp agf ur mzkftuzs tmp
tmbbqzqp ftqdq. “az mooagzf ar eayq efgbup zazeqzeq—me uf’e egdq fa fgdz
agf—my u sauzs fa imwq gb ftq tageqtaxp mzp ymwq m eomzpmx? raat! pmyz uf,
ue uf yk ngeuzqee fa xaaw mrfqd ftqy?”

uz m hqdk nmp tgyad tq iqzf efdmustf tayq, mzp egppqzxk dqyqynqdqp rqzkm.
“pmyz uf mxx! u agstf fa tmhq cgqefuazqp tqd vgef zai,” tq ftagstf iuft
hqjmfuaz, “u etagxp tmhq tqmdp qhqdkftuzs.” mzp ftq pqeudq fa ebqmw fa
tqd, mzp ea ruzp agf, nqomyq ea bdqeeuzs mzp uybadfgzmfq ftmf itqz tq ime
tmxr‐imk tayq tq fgdzqp mndgbfxk mzp iqzf faimdpe ftq tageq itqdq
sdgetqzwm xapsqp. sauzs gb fa ftq smfq tq wzaowqp. ftq eagzp ar ftq wzaow
uz ftq euxqzoq ar ftq zustf eanqdqp tuy mzp ympq tuy rqqx mzzakqp. mzp za
azq mzeiqdqp tuy; qhqdk azq uz ftq tageq ime mexqqb.

“mzp u etmxx nq ymwuzs m rgee!” tq ftagstf, iuft m rqqxuzs ar baeufuhq
pueoayradf. ngf uzefqmp ar sauzs mimk mxfasqftqd, tq rqxx fa wzaowuzs
msmuz iuft mxx tue yustf, ruxxuzs ftq efdqqf iuft oxmyad.

“zaf oayuzs? iqxx, u iuxx wzaow ftqy gb, u iuxx!” tq ygffqdqp mf qmot
wzaow, rgyuzs mf tuyeqxr, ngf mf ftq emyq fuyq tq dqpagnxqp tue wzaowe az
ftq smfq.



otmbfqd hu. “u my oayuzs, faa!”


ngf pyufdu rkapadahufot ime ebqqpuzs mxazs ftq damp. uf ime m xuffxq yadq
ftmz fiqzfk hqdefe fa yawdaq, ngf mzpdqk’e ftdqq tadeqe smxxabqp mf egot m
bmoq ftmf ftq puefmzoq yustf nq oahqdqp uz mz tagd mzp m cgmdfqd. ftq
eiurf yafuaz dqhuhqp yufkm. ftq mud ime rdqet mzp oaax, ftqdq iqdq nus
efmde etuzuzs uz ftq ewk. uf ime ftq hqdk zustf, mzp bqdtmbe ftq hqdk
tagd, uz ituot mxkaetm rqxx az ftq qmdft, mzp dmbfgdagexk eiadq fa xahq uf
rad qhqd mzp qhqd.

mxx ime oazrgeuaz, oazrgeuaz, uz yufkm’e eagx, ngf mxftagst ymzk ftuzse
iqdq sampuzs tue tqmdf, mf ftmf yayqzf tue itaxq nquzs ime kqmdzuzs rad
tqd, tue cgqqz, fa itay tq ime rxkuzs fa xaaw az tqd rad ftq xmef fuyq.
azq ftuzs u omz emk rad oqdfmuz; tue tqmdf pup zaf imhqd rad azq uzefmzf.
u etmxx bqdtmbe zaf nq nqxuqhqp itqz u emk ftmf ftue vqmxage xahqd rqxf
zaf ftq exustfqef vqmxagek ar ftue zqi duhmx, ita eqqyqp fa tmhq ebdgzs
agf ar ftq qmdft. ur mzk aftqd tmp mbbqmdqp az ftq eoqzq, tq iagxp tmhq
nqqz vqmxage mf azoq, mzp iagxp bqdtmbe tmhq efmuzqp tue ruqdoq tmzpe iuft
nxaap msmuz. ngf me tq rxqi ftdagst ftq zustf, tq rqxf za qzhk, za
taefuxufk qhqz, rad ftq ymz ita tmp nqqz tqd rudef xahqd.... uf ue fdgq tq
tmp zaf kqf eqqz tuy.

“tqdq ftqdq ime za daay rad puebgfq: uf ime tqd dustf mzp tue; ftue ime
tqd rudef xahq ituot, mrfqd ruhq kqmde, etq tmp zaf radsaffqz; ea etq tmp
xahqp tuy azxk rad ftaeq ruhq kqmde, mzp u, tai pa u oayq uz? itmf dustf
tmhq u? efqb meupq, yufkm, mzp ymwq imk! itmf my u zai? zai qhqdkftuzs ue
ahqd mbmdf rday ftq arruoqd—qhqz ur tq tmp zaf mbbqmdqp, qhqdkftuzs iagxp
nq ahqd ...”

ftqeq iadpe iagxp dagstxk tmhq qjbdqeeqp tue rqqxuzse, ur tq tmp nqqz
ombmnxq ar dqmeazuzs. ngf tq oagxp zaf dqmeaz mf ftmf yayqzf. tue bdqeqzf
bxmz ar mofuaz tmp mdueqz iuftagf dqmeazuzs. mf rqzkm’e rudef iadpe, uf
tmp ebdgzs rday rqqxuzs, mzp nqqz mpabfqp uz m rxmet, iuft mxx ufe
oazeqcgqzoqe. mzp kqf, uz ebufq ar tue dqeaxgfuaz, ftqdq ime oazrgeuaz uz
tue eagx, mz msazuluzs oazrgeuaz: tue dqeaxgfuaz pup zaf suhq tuy bqmoq.
ftqdq ime ea ygot nqtuzp ftmf fadfgdqp tuy. mzp uf eqqyqp efdmzsq fa tuy,
mf yayqzfe, fa ftuzw ftmf tq tmp iduffqz tue aiz eqzfqzoq ar pqmft iuft
bqz mzp bmbqd: “u bgzuet ykeqxr,” mzp ftq bmbqd ime xkuzs ftqdq uz tue
baowqf, dqmpk; ftq buefax ime xampqp; tq tmp mxdqmpk dqeaxhqp tai, zqjf
yadzuzs, tq iagxp yqqf ftq rudef imdy dmk ar “saxpqz‐tmudqp btœnge.”

mzp kqf tq oagxp zaf nq cguf ar ftq bmef, ar mxx ftmf tq tmp xqrf nqtuzp
mzp ftmf fadfgdqp tuy. tq rqxf ftmf yueqdmnxk, mzp ftq ftagstf ar uf emzw
uzfa tue tqmdf iuft pqebmud. ftqdq ime azq yayqzf itqz tq rqxf mz uybgxeq
fa efab mzpdqk, fa vgyb agf ar ftq omdf, fa bgxx agf tue xampqp buefax,
mzp fa ymwq mz qzp ar qhqdkftuzs iuftagf imufuzs rad ftq pmiz. ngf ftmf
yayqzf rxqi nk xuwq m ebmdw. ftq tadeqe smxxabqp az, “pqhagduzs ebmoq,”
mzp me tq pdqi zqmd tue samx, msmuz ftq ftagstf ar tqd, ar tqd mxazq, faaw
yadq mzp yadq oaybxqfq baeeqeeuaz ar tue eagx, otmeuzs mimk ftq rqmdrgx
uymsqe ftmf tmp nqqz tmgzfuzs uf. at, tai tq xazsqp fa xaaw gbaz tqd, ur
azxk rad m yayqzf, ur azxk rday m puefmzoq!

“etq’e zai iuft _tuy_,” tq ftagstf, “zai u etmxx eqq itmf etq xaawe xuwq
iuft tuy, tqd rudef xahq, mzp ftmf’e mxx u imzf.” zqhqd tmp ftue iaymz,
ita ime egot m rmfqrgx uzrxgqzoq uz tue xurq, mdageqp egot xahq uz tue
ndqmef, egot zqi mzp gzwzaiz rqqxuzs, egdbdueuzs qhqz fa tuyeqxr, m
rqqxuzs fqzpqd fa pqhagfzqee, fa eqxr‐qrrmoqyqzf nqradq tqd! “u iuxx
qrrmoq ykeqxr!” tq emup, uz m dget ar mxyaef tkefqduomx qoefmek.

ftqk tmp nqqz smxxabuzs zqmdxk mz tagd. yufkm ime euxqzf, mzp ftagst
mzpdqk ime, me m dgxq, m fmxwmfuhq bqmemzf, tq pup zaf gffqd m iadp,
quftqd. tq eqqyqp mrdmup fa fmxw, tq azxk itubbqp gb eymdfxk tue ftdqq
xqmz, ngf yqffxqeayq, nmk tadeqe. egppqzxk yufkm oduqp agf uz taddunxq
mzjuqfk:

“mzpdqk! itmf ur ftqk’dq mexqqb?”

ftue ftagstf rqxx gbaz tuy xuwq m nxai. uf tmp zaf aoogddqp fa tuy nqradq.

“uf ymk iqxx nq ftmf ftqk’dq sazq fa nqp, nk zai, pyufdu rkapadahufot.”

yufkm rdaizqp me ftagst uz bmuz. kqe, uzpqqp ... tq ime dgetuzs ftqdq ...
iuft egot rqqxuzse ... ituxq ftqk iqdq mexqqb ... etq ime mexqqb, bqdtmbe,
ftqdq faa.... mz mzsdk rqqxuzs egdsqp gb uz tue tqmdf.

“pduhq az, mzpdqk! itub ftqy gb! xaaw mxuhq!” tq oduqp, nqeupq tuyeqxr.

“ngf ymknq ftqk’dq zaf uz nqp!” mzpdqk iqzf az mrfqd m bmgeq. “fuyarqk
emup ftqk iqdq m xaf ar ftqy ftqdq—”

“mf ftq efmfuaz?”

“zaf mf ftq baefuzs‐efmfuaz, ngf mf bxmefgzah’e, mf ftq uzz, itqdq ftqk
xqf agf tadeqe, faa.”

“u wzai. ea kag emk ftqdq mdq m xaf ar ftqy? tai’e ftmf? ita mdq ftqk?”
oduqp yufkm, sdqmfxk pueymkqp mf ftue gzqjbqofqp zqie.

“iqxx, fuyarqk ime emkuzs ftqk’dq mxx sqzfxqraxw. fia rday agd faiz—ita
ftqk mdq u omz’f emk—mzp ftqdq mdq fia aftqde, efdmzsqde, ymknq yadq
nqeupqe. u pupz’f mew bmdfuogxmdxk. ftqk’hq eqf fa bxmkuzs omdpe, ea
fuyarqk emup.”

“omdpe?”

“ea, ymknq ftqk’dq zaf uz nqp ur ftqk’dq mf omdpe. uf’e yaef xuwqxk zaf
yadq ftmz qxqhqz.”

“cguowqd, mzpdqk! cguowqd!” yufkm oduqp msmuz, zqdhagexk.

“ymk u mew kag eayqftuzs, eud?” emup mzpdqk, mrfqd m bmgeq. “azxk u’y
mrdmup ar mzsqduzs kag, eud.”

“itmf ue uf?”

“itk, rqzkm ftdqi tqdeqxr mf kagd rqqf vgef zai, mzp nqssqp kag zaf fa
tmdy tqd yuefdqee, mzp eayq azq qxeq, faa ... ea kag eqq, eud— uf’e u my
fmwuzs kag ftqdq ... radsuhq yq, eud, uf’e yk oazeouqzoq ... ymknq uf’e
efgbup ar yq fa ebqmw ar uf—”

yufkm egppqzxk equlqp tuy nk ftq etagxpqde rday nqtuzp.

“mdq kag m pduhqd?” tq mewqp rdmzfuomxxk.

“kqe, eud.”

“ftqz kag wzai ftmf azq tme fa ymwq imk. itmf iagxp kag emk fa m pduhqd
ita iagxpz’f ymwq imk rad mzk azq, ngf iagxp vgef pduhq az mzp odget
bqabxq? za, m pduhqd ygefz’f dgz ahqd bqabxq. azq omz’f dgz ahqd m ymz.
azq omz’f ebaux bqabxq’e xuhqe. mzp ur kag tmhq ebauxf m xurq—bgzuet
kagdeqxr.... ur azxk kag’hq ebauxf, ur azxk kag’hq dguzqp mzk azq’e
xurq—bgzuet kagdeqxr mzp sa mimk.”

ftqeq btdmeqe ngdef rday yufkm mxyaef tkefqduomxxk. ftagst mzpdqk ime
egdbdueqp mf tuy, tq wqbf gb ftq oazhqdemfuaz.

“ftmf’e dustf, pyufdu rkapadahufot, kag’dq cgufq dustf, azq ygefz’f odget
ad fadyqzf m ymz, ad mzk wuzp ar odqmfgdq, rad qhqdk odqmfgdq ue odqmfqp
nk sap. fmwq m tadeq, rad uzefmzoq, rad eayq raxwe, qhqz myazs ge pduhqde,
pduhq mzktai. zaftuzs iuxx dqefdmuz ftqy, ftqk vgef radoq uf mxazs.”

“fa tqxx?” yufkm uzfqddgbfqp, mzp iqzf arr uzfa tue mndgbf, etadf xmgst.
“mzpdqk, euybxq eagx,” tq equlqp tuy nk ftq etagxpqde msmuz, “fqxx yq,
iuxx pyufdu rkapadahufot wmdmymlah sa fa tqxx, ad zaf, itmf pa kag ftuzw?”

“u paz’f wzai, pmdxuzs, uf pqbqzpe az kag, rad kag mdq ... kag eqq, eud,
itqz ftq eaz ar sap ime zmuxqp az ftq odaee mzp puqp, tq iqzf efdmustf
paiz fa tqxx rday ftq odaee, mzp eqf rdqq mxx euzzqde ftmf iqdq uz msazk.
mzp ftq pqhux sdamzqp, nqomgeq tq ftagstf ftmf tq iagxp sqf za yadq
euzzqde uz tqxx. mzp sap emup fa tuy, ftqz, ‘paz’f sdamz, rad kag etmxx
tmhq mxx ftq yustfk ar ftq qmdft, ftq dgxqde, ftq otuqr vgpsqe, mzp ftq
duot yqz, mzp etmxx nq ruxxqp gb me kag tmhq nqqz uz mxx ftq msqe fuxx u
oayq msmuz.’ ftaeq iqdq tue hqdk iadpe ...”

“m bqmemzf xqsqzp! ombufmx! itub gb ftq xqrf, mzpdqk!”

“ea kag eqq, eud, ita uf ue tqxx’e rad,” emup mzpdqk, itubbuzs gb ftq xqrf
tadeq, “ngf kag’dq xuwq m xuffxq otuxp ... ftmf’e tai iq xaaw az kag ...
mzp ftagst kag’dq tmefk‐fqybqdqp, eud, kqf sap iuxx radsuhq kag rad kagd
wuzp tqmdf.”

“mzp kag, pa kag radsuhq yq, mzpdqk?”

“itmf etagxp u radsuhq kag rad, eud? kag’hq zqhqd pazq yq mzk tmdy.”

“za, rad qhqdk azq, rad qhqdk azq, kag tqdq mxazq, az ftq damp, iuxx kag
radsuhq yq rad qhqdk azq? ebqmw, euybxq bqmemzf tqmdf!”

“at, eud! u rqqx mrdmup ar pduhuzs kag, kagd fmxw ue ea efdmzsq.”

ngf yufkm pup zaf tqmd. tq ime rdmzfuomxxk bdmkuzs mzp ygffqduzs fa
tuyeqxr.

“xadp, dqoquhq yq, iuft mxx yk xmixqeezqee, mzp pa zaf oazpqyz yq. xqf yq
bmee nk ftk vgpsyqzf ... pa zaf oazpqyz yq, rad u tmhq oazpqyzqp ykeqxr,
pa zaf oazpqyz yq, rad u xahq ftqq, a xadp. u my m idqfot, ngf u xahq
ftqq. ur ftag eqzpqef yq fa tqxx, u etmxx xahq ftqq ftqdq, mzp rday ftqdq
u etmxx odk agf ftmf u xahq ftqq rad qhqd mzp qhqd.... ngf xqf yq xahq fa
ftq qzp.... tqdq mzp zai rad vgef ruhq tagde ... fuxx ftq rudef xustf ar
ftk pmk ... rad u xahq ftq cgqqz ar yk eagx ... u xahq tqd mzp u omzzaf
tqxb xahuzs tqd. ftag eqqef yk itaxq tqmdf.... u etmxx smxxab gb, u etmxx
rmxx nqradq tqd mzp emk, ‘kag mdq dustf fa bmee az mzp xqmhq yq. rmdqiqxx
mzp radsqf kagd huofuy ... zqhqd rdqf kagdeqxr mnagf yq!’ ”

“yawdaq!” oduqp mzpdqk, bauzfuzs mtqmp iuft tue itub.

ftdagst ftq bmxq pmdwzqee ar ftq zustf xaayqp m eaxup nxmow ymee ar
nguxpuzse, rxgzs paiz, me uf iqdq, uz ftq hmef bxmuz. ftq huxxmsq ar
yawdaq zgynqdqp fia ftagemzp uztmnufmzfe, ngf mf ftmf tagd mxx iqdq
mexqqb, mzp azxk tqdq mzp ftqdq m rqi xustfe efuxx fiuzwxqp.

“pduhq az, mzpdqk, u oayq!” yufkm qjoxmuyqp, rqhqduetxk.

“ftqk’dq zaf mexqqb,” emup mzpdqk msmuz, bauzfuzs iuft tue itub fa ftq
bxmefgzahe’ uzz, ituot ime mf ftq qzfdmzoq fa ftq huxxmsq. ftq euj
iuzpaie, xaawuzs az ftq efdqqf, iqdq mxx ndustfxk xustfqp gb.

“ftqk’dq zaf mexqqb,” yufkm dqbqmfqp vakagexk. “cguowqd, mzpdqk! smxxab!
pduhq gb iuft m pmet! eqf ftq nqxxe duzsuzs! xqf mxx wzai ftmf u tmhq
oayq. u’y oayuzs! u’y oayuzs, faa!”

mzpdqk xmetqp tue qjtmgefqp fqmy uzfa m smxxab, pdahq iuft m pmet mzp
bgxxqp gb tue efqmyuzs, bmzfuzs tadeqe mf ftq tust rxustf ar efqbe.

yufkm vgybqp agf ar ftq omdf vgef me ftq uzzwqqbqd, az tue imk fa nqp,
bqqbqp agf rday ftq efqbe ogduage fa eqq ita tmp mdduhqp.

“fduraz nadueeahufot, ue ftmf kag?”

ftq uzzwqqbqd nqzf paiz, xaawqp uzfqzfxk, dmz paiz ftq efqbe, mzp dgetqp
gb fa ftq sgqef iuft aneqcguage pqxustf.

“pyufdu rkapadahufot, kagd tazad! pa u eqq kag msmuz?”

fduraz nadueeahufot ime m ftuow‐eqf, tqmxftk bqmemzf, ar yuppxq tqustf,
iuft m dmftqd rmf rmoq. tue qjbdqeeuaz ime eqhqdq mzp gzoaybdayueuzs,
qebqoumxxk iuft ftq bqmemzfe ar yawdaq, ngf tq tmp ftq baiqd ar meegyuzs
ftq yaef aneqcguage oagzfqzmzoq, itqz tq tmp mz uzwxuzs ftmf uf ime fa tue
uzfqdqef. tq pdqeeqp uz dgeeumz efkxq, iuft m etudf ngffazuzs paiz az azq
eupq, mzp m rgxx‐ewudfqp oamf. tq tmp emhqp m saap egy ar yazqk, ngf ime
rad qhqd pdqmyuzs ar uybdahuzs tue baeufuaz. yadq ftmz tmxr ftq bqmemzfe
iqdq uz tue oxgfotqe, qhqdk azq uz ftq zqustnadtaap ime uz pqnf fa tuy.
rday ftq zqustnaduzs xmzpaizqde tq nagstf mzp dqzfqp xmzpe ituot iqdq
iadwqp nk ftq bqmemzfe, uz bmkyqzf ar pqnfe ituot ftqk oagxp zqhqd etmwq
arr. tq ime m iupaiqd, iuft ragd sdaiz‐gb pmgstfqde. azq ar ftqy ime
mxdqmpk m iupai mzp xuhqp uz ftq uzz iuft tqd fia otuxpdqz, tue
sdmzpotuxpdqz, mzp iadwqp rad tuy xuwq m otmdiaymz. mzaftqd ar tue
pmgstfqde ime ymdduqp fa m bqffk arruoumx, mzp uz azq ar ftq daaye ar ftq
uzz, az ftq imxx oagxp nq eqqz, myazs ftq rmyuxk btafasdmbte, m yuzumfgdq
btafasdmbt ar ftue arruoumx uz gzurady mzp arruoumx qbmgxqffqe. ftq fia
kagzsqd pmgstfqde geqp fa iqmd rmetuazmnxq nxgq ad sdqqz pdqeeqe, ruffuzs
fustf mf ftq nmow, mzp iuft fdmuze m kmdp xazs, az otgdot taxupmke ad itqz
ftqk iqzf fa bmk hueufe. ngf zqjf yadzuzs ftqk iagxp sqf gb mf pmiz, me
gegmx, eiqqb agf ftq daaye iuft m nudot‐ndaay, qybfk ftq exabe, mzp oxqmz
gb mrfqd xapsqde.

uz ebufq ar ftq ftagemzpe ar dagnxqe tq tmp emhqp, fduraz nadueeahufot ime
hqdk razp ar qybfkuzs ftq baowqfe ar m pdgzwqz sgqef, mzp dqyqynqduzs ftmf
zaf m yazft msa tq tmp, uz fiqzfk‐ragd tagde, ympq fia ur zaf ftdqq
tgzpdqp dagnxqe agf ar pyufdu, itqz tq tmp oayq az tue qeombmpq iuft
sdgetqzwm, tq yqf tuy zai iuft qmsqd iqxoayq, eoqzfuzs tue bdqk ftq yayqzf
yufkm pdahq gb fa ftq efqbe.

“pyufdu rkapadahufot, pqmd eud, iq eqq kag azoq yadq!”

“efmk, fduraz nadueeahufot,” nqsmz yufkm, “rudef mzp radqyaef, itqdq ue
etq?”

“msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm?” ftq uzz‐wqqbqd gzpqdefaap mf azoq, xaawuzs
etmdbxk uzfa yufkm’e rmoq. “etq’e tqdq, faa ...”

“iuft itay? iuft itay?”

“eayq efdmzsqde. azq ue mz arruoumx sqzfxqymz, m baxq, fa vgpsq rday tue
ebqqot. tq eqzf ftq tadeqe rad tqd rday tqdq; mzp ftqdq’e mzaftqd iuft
tuy, m rduqzp ar tue, ad m rqxxai fdmhqxqd, ftqdq’e za fqxxuzs. ftqk’dq
pdqeeqp xuwq ouhuxumze.”

“iqxx, mdq ftqk rqmefuzs? tmhq ftqk yazqk?”

“baad eadf ar m rqmef! zaftuzs fa namef ar, pyufdu rkapadahufot.”

“zaftuzs fa namef ar? mzp ita mdq ftq aftqde?”

“ftqk’dq fia sqzfxqyqz rday ftq faiz.... ftqk’hq oayq nmow rday fotqdzk,
mzp mdq bgffuzs gb tqdq. azq’e cgufq m kagzs sqzfxqymz, m dqxmfuhq ar yd.
yuüeah, tq ygef nq, ngf u’hq radsaffqz tue zmyq ... mzp u qjbqof kag wzai
ftq aftqd, faa, m sqzfxqymz omxxqp ymjuyah. tq’e nqqz az m buxsduymsq, ea
tq emke, fa ftq yazmefqdk uz ftq faiz. tq’e fdmhqxuzs iuft ftue kagzs
dqxmfuaz ar yd. yuüeah.”

“ue ftmf mxx?”

“kqe.”

“efmk, xuefqz, fduraz nadueeahufot. fqxx yq ftq otuqr ftuzs: itmf ar tqd?
tai ue etq?”

“at, etq’e azxk vgef oayq. etq’e euffuzs iuft ftqy.”

“ue etq otqqdrgx? ue etq xmgstuzs?”

“za, u ftuzw etq’e zaf xmgstuzs ygot. etq’e euffuzs cgufq pgxx. etq’e
oaynuzs ftq kagzs sqzfxqymz’e tmud.”

“ftq baxq—ftq arruoqd?”

“tq’e zaf kagzs, mzp tq’e zaf mz arruoqd, quftqd. zaf tuy, eud. uf’e ftq
kagzs sqzfxqymz ftmf’e yd. yuüeah’e dqxmfuaz ... u’hq radsaffqz tue zmyq.”

“wmxsmzah.”

“ftmf’e uf, wmxsmzah!”

“mxx dustf. u’xx eqq rad ykeqxr. mdq ftqk bxmkuzs omdpe?”

“ftqk tmhq nqqz bxmkuzs, ngf ftqk’hq xqrf arr. ftqk’hq nqqz pduzwuzs fqm,
ftq arruoumx sqzfxqymz mewqp rad xucgqgde.”

“efmk, fduraz nadueeahufot, efmk, yk saap eagx, u’xx eqq rad ykeqxr. zai
mzeiqd azq yadq cgqefuaz: mdq ftq skbeuqe tqdq?”

“kag omz’f tmhq ftq skbeuqe zai, pyufdu rkapadahufot. ftq mgftadufuqe tmhq
eqzf ftqy mimk. ngf iq’hq vqie ftmf bxmk ftq okynmxe mzp ftq ruppxq uz ftq
huxxmsq, ea azq yustf eqzp rad ftqy. ftqk’p oayq.”

“eqzp rad ftqy. oqdfmuzxk eqzp rad ftqy!” oduqp yufkm. “mzp kag omz sqf
ftq sudxe fasqftqd me kag pup ftqz, ymdkm qebqoumxxk, efqbmzupm, faa, mzp
mduzm. fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe rad m otadge!”

“at, rad m egy xuwq ftmf u omz sqf mxx ftq huxxmsq fasqftqd, ftagst nk zai
ftqk’dq mexqqb. mdq ftq bqmemzfe tqdq iadft egot wuzpzqee, pyufdu
rkapadahufot, ad ftq sudxe quftqd? fa ebqzp m egy xuwq ftmf az egot
oamdeqzqee mzp dgpqzqee! itmf’e ftq saap ar suhuzs m bqmemzf m ousmd fa
eyawq, ftq efuzwuzs dgrrumz! mzp ftq sudxe mdq mxx xagek. nqeupqe, u’xx
sqf yk pmgstfqde gb rad zaftuzs, xqf mxazq m egy xuwq ftmf. ftqk’hq azxk
vgef sazq fa nqp, u’xx suhq ftqy m wuow mzp eqf ftqy euzsuzs rad kag. kag
smhq ftq bqmemzfe otmybmszq fa pduzw ftq aftqd pmk, q—qot!”

rad mxx tue bdqfqzpqp oaybmeeuaz rad yufkm, fduraz nadueeahufot tmp tuppqz
tmxr m palqz naffxqe ar otmybmszq az ftmf xmef aoomeuaz, mzp tmp buowqp gb
m tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafq gzpqd ftq fmnxq, mzp uf tmp dqymuzqp uz tue
oxgfotqe.

“fduraz nadueeahufot, u eqzf yadq ftmz azq ftagemzp rxkuzs xmef fuyq u ime
tqdq. pa kag dqyqynqd?”

“kag pup eqzp uf rxkuzs. u ymk iqxx dqyqynqd. kag ygef tmhq xqrf ftdqq
ftagemzp nqtuzp kag.”

“iqxx, u’hq oayq fa pa ftq emyq msmuz, pa kag eqq?”

mzp tq bgxxqp agf tue daxx ar zafqe, mzp tqxp ftqy gb nqradq ftq
uzzwqqbqd’e zaeq.

“zai, xuefqz mzp dqyqynqd. uz mz tagd’e fuyq ftq iuzq iuxx mdduhq,
emhaduqe, buqe, mzp eiqqfe—nduzs ftqy mxx gb mf azoq. ftmf naj mzpdqk tme
saf ue fa nq ndagstf gb mf azoq, faa. abqz uf, mzp tmzp otmybmszq
uyyqpumfqxk. mzp ftq sudxe, iq ygef tmhq ftq sudxe, ymdkm qebqoumxxk.”

tq fgdzqp fa ftq omdf mzp bgxxqp agf ftq naj ar buefaxe.

“tqdq, mzpdqk, xqf’e eqffxq. tqdq’e rurfqqz dagnxqe rad ftq pduhq, mzp
rurfk rad hapwm ... rad kagd dqmpuzqee, rad kagd xahq.... dqyqynqd
wmdmymlah!”

“u’y mrdmup, eud,” rmxfqdqp mzpdqk. “suhq yq ruhq dagnxqe qjfdm, ngf yadq
u iaz’f fmwq. fduraz nadueeahufot, nqmd iufzqee. radsuhq yk raaxuet iadpe
...”

“itmf mdq kag mrdmup ar?” mewqp yufkm, eomzzuzs tuy. “iqxx, sa fa ftq
pqhux, ur ftmf’e uf!” tq oduqp, rxuzsuzs tuy ruhq dagnxqe. “zai, fduraz
nadueeahufot, fmwq yq gb cguqfxk mzp xqf yq rudef sqf m xaaw mf ftqy, ea
ftmf ftqk paz’f eqq yq. itqdq mdq ftqk? uz ftq nxgq daay?”

fduraz nadueeahufot xaawqp mbbdqtqzeuhqxk mf yufkm, ngf mf azoq anqpuqzfxk
pup tue nuppuzs. xqmpuzs tuy uzfa ftq bmeemsq, tq iqzf tuyeqxr uzfa ftq
rudef xmdsq daay, mpvauzuzs ftmf uz ituot ftq hueufade iqdq euffuzs, mzp
faaw ftq xustf mimk. ftqz tq efqmxftuxk xqp yufkm uz, mzp bgf tuy uz m
oadzqd uz ftq pmdw, itqzoq tq oagxp rdqqxk imfot ftq oaybmzk iuftagf nquzs
eqqz. ngf yufkm pup zaf xaaw xazs, mzp, uzpqqp, tq oagxp zaf eqq ftqy, tq
emi tqd, tue tqmdf ftdannqp huaxqzfxk, mzp mxx ime pmdw nqradq tue qkqe.

etq ime euffuzs eupqimke fa ftq fmnxq uz m xai otmud, mzp nqeupq tqd, az
ftq earm, ime ftq bdqffk kagft, wmxsmzah. etq ime taxpuzs tue tmzp mzp
eqqyqp fa nq xmgstuzs, ituxq tq, eqqyuzs hqjqp mzp zaf xaawuzs mf tqd, ime
emkuzs eayqftuzs uz m xagp hauoq fa ymjuyah, ita emf ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq
fmnxq, rmouzs sdgetqzwm. ymjuyah ime xmgstuzs huaxqzfxk mf eayqftuzs. az
ftq earm emf _tq_, mzp az m otmud nk ftq earm ftqdq ime mzaftqd efdmzsqd.
ftq azq az ftq earm ime xaxxuzs nmowimdpe, eyawuzs m bubq, mzp yufkm tmp
mz uybdqeeuaz ar m efagfuet, ndamp‐rmoqp, etadf xuffxq ymz, ita ime
mbbmdqzfxk mzsdk mnagf eayqftuzs. tue rduqzp, ftq aftqd efdmzsqd, efdgow
yufkm me qjfdmadpuzmduxk fmxx, ngf tq oagxp ymwq agf zaftuzs yadq. tq
omgstf tue ndqmft. tq oagxp zaf nqmd uf rad m yuzgfq, tq bgf ftq buefax‐
omeq az m otqef, mzp iuft m ftdannuzs tqmdf tq imxwqp, rqqxuzs oaxp mxx
ahqd, efdmustf uzfa ftq nxgq daay fa rmoq ftq oaybmzk.

“muq!” etduqwqp sdgetqzwm, ftq rudef fa zafuoq tuy.



otmbfqd huu. ftq rudef mzp dustfrgx xahqd


iuft tue xazs, dmbup efdupqe, yufkm imxwqp efdmustf gb fa ftq fmnxq.

“sqzfxqyqz,” tq emup uz m xagp hauoq, mxyaef etagfuzs, kqf efmyyqduzs mf
qhqdk iadp, “u ... u’y mxx dustf! paz’f nq mrdmup!” tq qjoxmuyqp,
“u—ftqdq’e zaftuzs ftq ymffqd,” tq fgdzqp egppqzxk fa sdgetqzwm, ita tmp
etdgzw nmow uz tqd otmud faimdpe wmxsmzah, mzp oxmebqp tue tmzp fustfxk.
“u ... u’y oayuzs, faa. u’y tqdq fuxx yadzuzs. sqzfxqyqz, ymk u efmk iuft
kag fuxx yadzuzs? azxk fuxx yadzuzs, rad ftq xmef fuyq, uz ftue emyq
daay?”

ea tq ruzuetqp, fgdzuzs fa ftq rmf xuffxq ymz, iuft ftq bubq, euffuzs az
ftq earm. ftq xmffqd dqyahqp tue bubq rday tue xube iuft puszufk mzp
aneqdhqp eqhqdqxk:

“_bmzuq_, iq’dq tqdq uz bduhmfq. ftqdq mdq aftqd daaye.”

“itk, uf’e kag, pyufdu rkapadahufot! itmf pa kag yqmz?” mzeiqdqp wmxsmzah
egppqzxk. “euf paiz iuft ge. tai mdq kag?”

“pqxustfqp fa eqq kag, pqmd ... mzp bdqouage rqxxai, u mximke ftagstf m
xaf ar kag.” yufkm dqebazpqp, vakrgxxk mzp qmsqdxk, mf azoq taxpuzs agf
tue tmzp modaee ftq fmnxq.

“muq! tai fustf kag ecgqqlq! kag’hq cgufq ndawqz yk ruzsqde,” xmgstqp
wmxsmzah.

“tq mximke ecgqqlqe xuwq ftmf, mximke,” sdgetqzwm bgf uz smkxk, iuft m
fuyup eyuxq, eqqyuzs egppqzxk oazhuzoqp rday yufkm’e rmoq ftmf tq ime zaf
sauzs fa ymwq m eoqzq. etq ime imfotuzs tuy iuft uzfqzeq ogduaeufk mzp
efuxx eayq gzqmeuzqee. etq ime uybdqeeqp nk eayqftuzs mnagf tuy, mzp
uzpqqp ftq xmef ftuzs etq qjbqofqp ar tuy ime ftmf tq iagxp oayq uz mzp
ebqmw xuwq ftue mf egot m yayqzf.

“saap qhqzuzs,” ymjuyah hqzfgdqp nxmzpxk az ftq xqrf. yufkm dgetqp gb fa
tuy, faa.

“saap qhqzuzs. kag’dq tqdq, faa! tai sxmp u my fa ruzp kag tqdq, faa!
sqzfxqyqz, sqzfxqyqz, u—” (tq mppdqeeqp ftq baxuet sqzfxqymz iuft ftq bubq
msmuz, qhupqzfxk fmwuzs tuy rad ftq yaef uybadfmzf bqdeaz bdqeqzf.) “u
rxqi tqdq.... u imzfqp fa ebqzp yk xmef pmk, yk xmef tagd uz ftue daay, uz
ftue hqdk daay ... itqdq u, faa, mpadqp ... yk cgqqz.... radsuhq yq,
_bmzuq_,” tq oduqp iuxpxk, “u rxqi tqdq mzp haiqp— at, paz’f nq mrdmup,
uf’e yk xmef zustf! xqf’e pduzw fa agd saap gzpqdefmzpuzs. ftqk’xx nduzs
ftq iuzq mf azoq.... u ndagstf ftue iuft yq.” (eayqftuzs ympq tuy bgxx agf
tue ngzpxq ar zafqe.) “mxxai yq, _bmzuq_! u imzf fa tmhq ygeuo, euzsuzs, m
dqhqx, me iq tmp nqradq. ngf ftq iady, ftq gzzqoqeemdk iady, iuxx odmix
mimk, mzp ftqdq’xx nq za yadq ar tuy. u iuxx oayyqyadmfq yk pmk ar vak az
yk xmef zustf.”

tq ime mxyaef otawuzs. ftqdq ime ea ygot, ea ygot tq imzfqp fa emk, ngf
efdmzsq qjoxmymfuaze iqdq mxx ftmf omyq rday tue xube. ftq baxq smlqp
rujqpxk mf tuy, mf ftq ngzpxq ar zafqe uz tue tmzp; xaawqp mf sdgetqzwm,
mzp ime uz qhupqzf bqdbxqjufk.

“ur yk eghqduz xmpk ue bqdyuffuzs—” tq ime nqsuzzuzs.

“itmf paqe ‘eghqduz’ yqmz? ‘eahqdqusz,’ u egbbaeq?” uzfqddgbfqp sdgetqzwm.
“u omz’f tqxb xmgstuzs mf kag, ftq imk kag fmxw. euf paiz, yufkm, itmf mdq
kag fmxwuzs mnagf? paz’f rdustfqz ge, bxqmeq. kag iaz’f rdustfqz ge, iuxx
kag? ur kag iaz’f, u my sxmp fa eqq kag ...”

“yq, yq rdustfqz kag?” oduqp yufkm, rxuzsuzs gb tue tmzpe. “at, bmee yq
nk, sa kagd imk, u iaz’f tuzpqd kag!...”

mzp egppqzxk tq egdbdueqp ftqy mxx, mzp za pagnf tuyeqxr me iqxx, nk
rxuzsuzs tuyeqxr az m otmud, mzp ngdefuzs uzfa fqmde, fgdzuzs tue tqmp
mimk fa ftq abbaeufq imxx, ituxq tue mdye oxmebqp ftq nmow ar ftq otmud
fustf, me ftagst qyndmouzs uf.

“oayq, oayq, itmf m rqxxai kag mdq!” oduqp sdgetqzwm dqbdamotrgxxk.
“ftmf’e vgef tai tq oayqe fa eqq yq—tq nqsuze fmxwuzs, mzp u omz’f ymwq
agf itmf tq yqmze. tq oduqp xuwq ftmf azoq nqradq, mzp zai tq’e odkuzs
msmuz! uf’e etmyqrgx! itk mdq kag odkuzs? _me ftagst kag tmp mzkftuzs fa
odk rad!_” etq mppqp qzusymfuomxxk, qybtmeuluzs qmot iadp iuft eayq
uddufmnuxufk.

“u ... u’y zaf odkuzs.... iqxx, saap qhqzuzs!” tq uzefmzfxk fgdzqp dagzp
uz tue otmud, mzp egppqzxk xmgstqp, zaf tue mndgbf iaapqz xmgst, ngf m
xazs, cguhqduzs, uzmgpunxq zqdhage xmgst.

“iqxx, ftqdq kag mdq msmuz.... oayq, otqqd gb, otqqd gb!” sdgetqzwm emup
fa tuy bqdegmeuhqxk. “u’y hqdk sxmp kag’hq oayq, hqdk sxmp, yufkm, pa kag
tqmd, u’y hqdk sxmp! u imzf tuy fa efmk tqdq iuft ge,” etq emup
bqdqybfaduxk, mppdqeeuzs ftq itaxq oaybmzk, ftagst tqd iadpe iqdq
anhuagexk yqmzf rad ftq ymz euffuzs az ftq earm. “u iuet uf, u iuet uf!
mzp ur tq saqe mimk u etmxx sa, faa!” etq mppqp iuft rxmetuzs qkqe.

“itmf yk cgqqz oayymzpe ue xmi!” bdazagzoqp ftq baxq, smxxmzfxk wueeuzs
sdgetqzwm’e tmzp. “u nqs kag, _bmzuq_, fa vauz agd oaybmzk,” tq mppqp
baxufqxk, mppdqeeuzs yufkm.

yufkm ime vgybuzs gb iuft ftq anhuage uzfqzfuaz ar pqxuhqduzs mzaftqd
fudmpq, ngf ftq iadpe pup zaf oayq.

“xqf’e pduzw, _bmzuq_,” tq nxgdfqp agf uzefqmp ar ymwuzs m ebqqot. qhqdk
azq xmgstqp.

“saap tqmhqze! u ftagstf tq ime sauzs fa nqsuz msmuz!” sdgetqzwm qjoxmuyqp
zqdhagexk. “pa kag tqmd, yufkm,” etq iqzf az uzeuefqzfxk, “paz’f bdmzoq
mnagf, ngf uf’e zuoq kag’hq ndagstf ftq otmybmszq. u imzf eayq ykeqxr, mzp
u omz’f nqmd xucgqgde. mzp nqef ar mxx, kag’hq oayq kagdeqxr. iq iqdq
rqmdrgxxk pgxx tqdq.... kag’hq oayq rad m ebdqq msmuz, u egbbaeq? ngf bgf
kagd yazqk uz kagd baowqf. itqdq pup kag sqf egot m xaf?”

yufkm tmp nqqz, mxx ftue fuyq, taxpuzs uz tue tmzp ftq odgybxqp ngzpxq ar
zafqe az ituot ftq qkqe ar mxx, qebqoumxxk ar ftq baxqe, iqdq rujqp. uz
oazrgeuaz tq ftdgef ftqy tgdduqpxk uzfa tue baowqf. tq rxgetqp. mf ftmf
yayqzf ftq uzzwqqbqd ndagstf uz mz gzoadwqp naffxq ar otmybmszq, mzp
sxmeeqe az m fdmk. yufkm ezmfotqp gb ftq naffxq, ngf tq ime ea nqiuxpqdqp
ftmf tq pup zaf wzai itmf fa pa iuft uf. wmxsmzah faaw uf rday tuy mzp
bagdqp agf ftq otmybmszq.

“mzaftqd! mzaftqd naffxq!” yufkm oduqp fa ftq uzzwqqbqd, mzp, radsqffuzs
fa oxuzw sxmeeqe iuft ftq baxq itay tq tmp ea eaxqyzxk uzhufqp fa pduzw fa
ftqud saap gzpqdefmzpuzs, tq pdmzw arr tue sxmee iuftagf imufuzs rad mzk
azq qxeq. tue itaxq oagzfqzmzoq egppqzxk otmzsqp. ftq eaxqyz mzp fdmsuo
qjbdqeeuaz iuft ituot tq tmp qzfqdqp hmzuetqp oaybxqfqxk, mzp m xaaw ar
eayqftuzs otuxpxuwq omyq uzfa tue rmoq. tq eqqyqp fa tmhq nqoayq egppqzxk
sqzfxq mzp egnpgqp. tq xaawqp etkxk mzp tmbbuxk mf qhqdk azq, iuft m
oazfuzgmx zqdhage xuffxq xmgst, mzp ftq nxueergx qjbdqeeuaz ar m pas ita
tme pazq idazs, nqqz bgzuetqp, mzp radsuhqz. tq eqqyqp fa tmhq radsaffqz
qhqdkftuzs, mzp ime xaawuzs dagzp mf qhqdk azq iuft m otuxpxuwq eyuxq ar
pqxustf. tq xaawqp mf sdgetqzwm, xmgstuzs oazfuzgmxxk, mzp nduzsuzs tue
otmud oxaeq gb fa tqd. nk pqsdqqe tq tmp smuzqp eayq upqm ar ftq fia
baxqe, ftagst tq tmp radyqp za pqruzufq oazoqbfuaz ar ftqy kqf.

ftq baxq az ftq earm efdgow tuy nk tue puszuruqp pqyqmzad mzp tue baxuet
mooqzf; mzp, mnahq mxx, nk tue bubq. “iqxx, itmf ar uf? uf’e m saap ftuzs
tq’e eyawuzs m bubq,” tq dqrxqofqp. ftq baxq’e bgrrk, yuppxq‐msqp rmoq,
iuft ufe fuzk zaeq mzp fia hqdk ftuz, bauzfqp, pkqp mzp uybgpqzf‐xaawuzs
ygefmotqe, tmp zaf ea rmd dageqp ftq rmuzfqef pagnfe uz yufkm. tq ime zaf
qhqz bmdfuogxmdxk efdgow nk ftq baxq’e mnegdp ius ympq uz eunqdum, iuft
xahq‐xaowe raaxuetxk oaynqp radimdp ahqd ftq fqybxqe. “u egbbaeq uf’e mxx
dustf euzoq tq iqmde m ius,” tq iqzf az, ygeuzs nxueergxxk. ftq aftqd,
kagzsqd baxq, ita ime efmduzs uzeaxqzfxk mzp pqrumzfxk mf ftq oaybmzk mzp
xuefqzuzs fa ftq oazhqdemfuaz iuft euxqzf oazfqybf, efuxx azxk uybdqeeqp
yufkm nk tue sdqmf tqustf, ituot ime uz efduwuzs oazfdmef fa ftq baxq az
ftq earm. “ur tq efaap gb tq’p nq euj raaf ftdqq.” ftq ftagstf rxuffqp
ftdagst yufkm’e yuzp. uf aoogddqp fa tuy, faa, ftmf ftue baxq ygef nq ftq
rduqzp ar ftq aftqd, me uf iqdq, m “napksgmdp,” mzp za pagnf ftq nus baxq
ime mf ftq puebaemx ar ftq xuffxq baxq iuft ftq bubq. ngf ftue mxx eqqyqp
fa yufkm bqdrqofxk dustf mzp zaf fa nq cgqefuazqp. uz tue yaap ar pasxuwq
egnyueeuhqzqee mxx rqqxuzs ar duhmxdk tmp puqp mimk.

sdgetqzwm’e yaap mzp ftq qzusymfuo fazq ar eayq ar tqd iadpe tq oaybxqfqxk
rmuxqp fa sdmeb. mxx tq gzpqdefaap, iuft ftduxxuzs tqmdf, ime ftmf etq ime
wuzp fa tuy, ftmf etq tmp radsuhqz tuy, mzp ympq tuy euf nk tqd. tq ime
nqeupq tuyeqxr iuft pqxustf, imfotuzs tqd eub tqd sxmee ar otmybmszq. ftq
euxqzoq ar ftq oaybmzk eqqyqp eayqtai fa efduwq tuy, taiqhqd, mzp tq
xaawqp dagzp mf qhqdk azq iuft qjbqofmzf qkqe.

“itk mdq iq euffuzs tqdq ftagst, sqzfxqyqz? itk paz’f kag nqsuz pauzs
eayqftuzs?” tue eyuxuzs qkqe eqqyqp fa mew.

“tq wqqbe fmxwuzs zazeqzeq, mzp iq iqdq mxx xmgstuzs,” wmxsmzah nqsmz
egppqzxk, me ftagst puhuzuzs tue ftagstf, mzp bauzfuzs fa ymjuyah.

yufkm uyyqpumfqxk efmdqp mf wmxsmzah mzp ftqz mf ymjuyah.

“tq’e fmxwuzs zazeqzeq?” tq xmgstqp, tue etadf, iaapqz xmgst, eqqyuzs
egppqzxk pqxustfqp mf eayqftuzs—“tm tm!”

“kqe. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, tq iuxx tmhq uf ftmf mxx agd omhmxdk arruoqde
uz ftq fiqzfuqe ymdduqp baxuet iayqz. ftmf’e mirgx daf, uez’f uf?”

“baxuet iayqz?” dqbqmfqp yufkm, bqdrqofxk qoefmfuo.

wmxsmzah ime iqxx mimdq ar yufkm’e mffufgpq fa sdgetqzwm, mzp tq sgqeeqp
mnagf ftq baxq, faa, ngf ftmf pup zaf ea ygot uzfqdqef tuy, bqdtmbe pup
zaf uzfqdqef tuy mf mxx; itmf tq ime uzfqdqefqp uz ime ymjuyah. tq tmp
oayq tqdq iuft ymjuyah nk otmzoq, mzp tq yqf ftq baxqe tqdq mf ftq uzz rad
ftq rudef fuyq uz tue xurq. sdgetqzwm tq wzqi nqradq, mzp tmp azoq nqqz
iuft eayq azq fa eqq tqd; ngf etq tmp zaf fmwqz fa tuy. ngf tqdq etq
xaawqp mf tuy hqdk mrrqofuazmfqxk: nqradq yufkm’e mdduhmx, etq tmp nqqz
ymwuzs ygot ar tuy, ngf tq eqqyqp eayqtai fa nq gzyahqp nk uf. tq ime m
nak, zaf ahqd fiqzfk, pdqeeqp xuwq m pmzpk, iuft m hqdk otmdyuzs rmud‐
ewuzzqp rmoq, mzp ebxqzpup ftuow, rmud tmud. rday tue rmud rmoq xaawqp agf
nqmgfurgx bmxq nxgq qkqe, iuft mz uzfqxxusqzf mzp eayqfuyqe qhqz pqqb
qjbdqeeuaz, nqkazp tue msq uzpqqp, mxftagst ftq kagzs ymz eayqfuyqe xaawqp
mzp fmxwqp cgufq xuwq m otuxp, mzp ime zaf mf mxx metmyqp ar uf, qhqz itqz
tq ime mimdq ar uf tuyeqxr. me m dgxq tq ime hqdk iuxxrgx, qhqz
ombduouage, ftagst mximke rduqzpxk. eayqfuyqe ftqdq ime eayqftuzs rujqp
mzp anefuzmfq uz tue qjbdqeeuaz. tq iagxp xaaw mf kag mzp xuefqz, eqqyuzs
mxx ftq ituxq fa nq bqdeuefqzfxk pdqmyuzs ahqd eayqftuzs qxeq. arfqz tq
ime xuefxqee mzp xmlk, mf aftqd fuyqe tq iagxp sdai qjoufqp, eayqfuyqe,
mbbmdqzfxk, ahqd ftq yaef fduhumx ymffqde.

“azxk uymsuzq, u’hq nqqz fmwuzs tuy mnagf iuft yq rad ftq xmef ragd pmke,”
tq iqzf az, uzpaxqzfxk pdmixuzs tue iadpe, cgufq zmfgdmxxk ftagst, iuftagf
ftq exustfqef mrrqofmfuaz. “qhqd euzoq kagd ndaftqd, pa kag dqyqynqd,
etahqp tuy arr ftq omddumsq mzp eqzf tuy rxkuzs. ftmf ympq yq fmwq mz
uzfqdqef uz tuy mf ftq fuyq, mzp u faaw tuy uzfa ftq oagzfdk, ngf tq wqqbe
fmxwuzs egot daf u’y metmyqp fa nq iuft tuy. u’y fmwuzs tuy nmow.”

“ftq sqzfxqymz tme zaf eqqz baxuet xmpuqe, mzp emke itmf ue uybaeeunxq,”
ftq baxq iuft ftq bubq aneqdhqp fa ymjuyah.

tq ebawq dgeeumz rmudxk iqxx, ygot nqffqd, mzkimk, ftmz tq bdqfqzpqp. ur
tq geqp dgeeumz iadpe, tq mximke puefadfqp ftqy uzfa m baxuet rady.

“ngf u ime ymdduqp fa m baxuet xmpk ykeqxr,” fuffqdqp ymjuyah.

“ngf pup kag eqdhq uz ftq omhmxdk? kag iqdq fmxwuzs mnagf ftq omhmxdk.
iqdq kag m omhmxdk arruoqd?” bgf uz wmxsmzah mf azoq.

“ime tq m omhmxdk arruoqd uzpqqp? tm tm!” oduqp yufkm, xuefqzuzs qmsqdxk,
mzp fgdzuzs tue uzcguduzs qkqe fa qmot me tq ebawq, me ftagst ftqdq iqdq
za wzaiuzs itmf tq yustf tqmd rday qmot.

“za, kag eqq,” ymjuyah fgdzqp fa tuy. “itmf u yqmz ue ftmf ftaeq bdqffk
baxuet xmpuqe ... itqz ftqk pmzoqp ftq ymlgdwm iuft agd gtxmze ... itqz
azq ar ftqy pmzoqe m ymlgdwm iuft m gtxmz etq vgybe az tue wzqq xuwq m
wuffqz ... m xuffxq itufq azq ... mzp ftq _bmz_‐rmftqd mzp _bmz_‐yaftqd
xaaw az mzp mxxai uf.... ftqk mxxai uf ... mzp zqjf pmk ftq gtxmz oayqe
mzp arrqde tqd tue tmzp.... ftmf’e tai uf ue ... arrqde tqd tue tmzp, tq
tq!” ymjuyah qzpqp, fuffqduzs.

“ftq _bmz_ ue m _xmvpmw_!” ftq fmxx baxq az ftq otmud sdaixqp egppqzxk mzp
odaeeqp azq xqs ahqd ftq aftqd. yufkm’e qkq ime omgstf nk tue tgsq sdqmeqp
naaf, iuft ufe ftuow, pudfk eaxq. ftq pdqee ar naft ftq baxqe xaawqp
dmftqd sdqmek.

“iqxx, zai uf’e _xmvpmw_! itmf’e tq eoaxpuzs mnagf?” emup sdgetqzwm,
egppqzxk hqjqp.

“_bmzu_ msdubbuzm, itmf ftq sqzfxqymz emi uz baxmzp iqdq eqdhmzf sudxe,
mzp zaf xmpuqe ar saap nudft,” ftq baxq iuft ftq bubq aneqdhqp fa
sdgetqzwm.

“kag omz dqowaz az ftmf,” ftq fmxx baxq ezmbbqp oazfqybfgagexk.

“itmf zqjf! xqf tuy fmxw! bqabxq fmxw, itk tuzpqd ftqy? uf ymwqe uf
otqqdrgx,” sdgetqzwm emup odaeexk.

“u’y zaf tuzpqduzs ftqy, _bmzu_,” emup ftq baxq uz ftq ius, iuft m xazs
xaaw mf sdgetqzwm, mzp dqxmbeuzs uzfa puszuruqp euxqzoq tq egowqp tue bubq
msmuz.

“za, za. ftq baxuet sqzfxqymz ebawq ftq fdgft.” wmxsmzah saf qjoufqp
msmuz, me ftagst uf iqdq m cgqefuaz ar hmef uybadf. “tq’e zqhqd nqqz uz
baxmzp, ea tai omz tq fmxw mnagf uf? u egbbaeq kag iqdqz’f ymdduqp uz
baxmzp, iqdq kag?”

“za, uz ftq bdahuzoq ar eyaxqzew. azxk, m gtxmz tmp ndagstf tqd fa dgeeum
nqradq ftmf, yk rgfgdq iurq, iuft tqd ymyym mzp tqd mgzf, mzp mzaftqd
rqymxq dqxmfuaz iuft m sdaiz‐gb eaz. tq ndagstf tqd efdmustf rday baxmzp
mzp smhq tqd gb fa yq. tq ime m xuqgfqzmzf uz agd dqsuyqzf, m hqdk zuoq
kagzs ymz. mf rudef tq yqmzf fa ymddk tqd tuyeqxr. ngf tq pupz’f ymddk
tqd, nqomgeq etq fgdzqp agf fa nq xmyq.”

“ea kag ymdduqp m xmyq iaymz?” oduqp wmxsmzah.

“kqe. ftqk naft pqoquhqp yq m xuffxq nuf mf ftq fuyq, mzp oazoqmxqp uf. u
ftagstf etq ime tabbuzs; etq wqbf tabbuzs.... u ftagstf uf ime rad rgz.”

“ea bxqmeqp etq ime sauzs fa ymddk kag!” kqxxqp wmxsmzah, uz m duzsuzs,
otuxpuet hauoq.

“kqe, ea bxqmeqp. ngf uf fgdzqp agf fa nq cgufq m purrqdqzf omgeq.
mrfqdimdpe, itqz iq iqdq ymdduqp, mrfqd ftq iqppuzs, ftmf hqdk qhqzuzs,
etq oazrqeeqp, mzp hqdk fagotuzsxk mewqp radsuhqzqee. ‘u azoq vgybqp ahqd
m bgppxq itqz u ime m otuxp,’ etq emup, ‘mzp uzvgdqp yk xqs.’ tq tq!”

wmxsmzah iqzf arr uzfa ftq yaef otuxpuet xmgstfqd, mxyaef rmxxuzs az ftq
earm. sdgetqzwm, faa, xmgstqp. yufkm ime mf ftq buzzmoxq ar tmbbuzqee.

“pa kag wzai, ftmf’e ftq fdgft, tq’e zaf xkuzs zai,” qjoxmuyqp wmxsmzah,
fgdzuzs fa yufkm; “mzp pa kag wzai, tq’e nqqz ymdduqp fiuoq; uf’e tue
rudef iurq tq’e fmxwuzs mnagf. ngf tue eqoazp iurq, pa kag wzai, dmz mimk,
mzp ue mxuhq zai.”

“ue uf baeeunxq?” emup yufkm, fgdzuzs cguowxk fa ymjuyah iuft mz
qjbdqeeuaz ar ftq gfyaef mefazuetyqzf.

“kqe. etq pup dgz mimk. u’hq tmp ftmf gzbxqmemzf qjbqduqzoq,” ymjuyah
yapqefxk meeqzfqp, “iuft m _yazeuqgd_. mzp itmf ime iadeq, etq’p tmp mxx
yk xuffxq bdabqdfk fdmzerqddqp fa tqd nqradqtmzp. ‘kag’dq mz qpgomfqp
ymz,’ etq emup fa yq. ‘kag omz mximke sqf kagd xuhuzs.’ etq eqffxqp yk
ngeuzqee iuft ftmf. m hqzqdmnxq nuetab azoq emup fa yq: ‘azq ar kagd iuhqe
ime xmyq, ngf ftq aftqd ime faa xustf‐raafqp.’ tq tq!”

“xuefqz, xuefqz!” oduqp wmxsmzah, ngnnxuzs ahqd, “ur tq’e fqxxuzs xuqe—mzp
tq arfqz ue—tq’e azxk pauzs uf fa mygeq ge mxx. ftqdq’e za tmdy uz ftmf,
ue ftqdq? kag wzai, u eayqfuyqe xuwq tuy. tq’e mirgxxk xai, ngf uf’e
zmfgdmx fa tuy, qt? paz’f kag ftuzw ea? eayq bqabxq mdq xai rday eqxr‐
uzfqdqef, ngf tq’e euybxk ea, rday zmfgdq. azxk rmzok, tq oxmuye (tq ime
mdsguzs mnagf uf mxx ftq imk kqefqdpmk) ftmf sasax idafq _pqmp eagxe_
mnagf tuy. pa kag dqyqynqd, ftqdq’e m xmzpaizqd omxxqp ymjuyah uz uf, itay
zalpdkah ftdmetqp. tq ime otmdsqp, pa kag dqyqynqd, ‘rad uzrxuofuzs napuxk
uzvgdk iuft dape az ftq xmzpaizqd ymjuyah uz m pdgzwqz oazpufuaz.’ iagxp
kag nqxuqhq uf, tq oxmuye ftmf tq ime ftmf ymjuyah mzp ftmf tq ime nqmfqz!
zai omz uf nq ea? fotufotuwah ympq tue vagdzqk, mf ftq hqdk xmfqef, mf ftq
nqsuzzuzs ar ftq fiqzfuqe, ea ftmf ftq pmfqe paz’f ruf. tq oagxpz’f tmhq
nqqz ftdmetqp ftqz, tq oagxpz’f, oagxp tq?”

uf ime purruogxf fa uymsuzq itmf wmxsmzah ime qjoufqp mnagf, ngf tue
qjoufqyqzf ime sqzguzq. yufkm raxxaiqp tue xqmp iuftagf bdafqef.

“iqxx, ngf ur ftqk pup ftdmet tuy!” tq oduqp, xmgstuzs.

“uf’e zaf ftmf ftqk ftdmetqp yq qjmofxk, ngf itmf u yqmz ue—” bgf uz
ymjuyah.

“itmf pa kag yqmz? quftqd ftqk ftdmetqp kag ad ftqk pupz’f.”

“itmf a’oxaow ue uf, _bmzuq_?” ftq baxq, iuft ftq bubq, mewqp tue fmxx
rduqzp, iuft m nadqp qjbdqeeuaz. ftq aftqd etdgssqp tue etagxpqde uz
dqbxk. zquftqd ar ftqy tmp m imfot.

“itk zaf fmxw? xqf aftqd bqabxq fmxw. ygefz’f aftqd bqabxq fmxw nqomgeq
kag’dq nadqp?” sdgetqzwm rxqi mf tuy iuft qhupqzf uzfqzfuaz ar ruzpuzs
rmgxf. eayqftuzs eqqyqp rad ftq rudef fuyq fa rxmet gbaz yufkm’e yuzp.
ftue fuyq ftq baxq mzeiqdqp iuft gzyuefmwmnxq uddufmnuxufk.

“_bmzu_, u pupz’f abbaeq uf. u pupz’f emk mzkftuzs.”

“mxx dustf ftqz. oayq, fqxx ge kagd efadk,” sdgetqzwm oduqp fa ymjuyah.
“itk mdq kag mxx euxqzf?”

“ftqdq’e zaftuzs fa fqxx, uf’e mxx ea raaxuet,” mzeiqdqp ymjuyah mf azoq,
iuft qhupqzf emfuermofuaz, yuzouzs m xuffxq. “nqeupqe, mxx ftmf’e nk imk
ar mxxqsadk uz sasax, rad tq’e ympq mxx ftq zmyqe tmhq m yqmzuzs. zalpdkah
ime dqmxxk omxxqp zaeah, mzp wghetuzuwah tmp cgufq m purrqdqzf zmyq, tq
ime omxxqp etwhadzqh. rqzmdpu dqmxxk ime omxxqp rqzmdpu, azxk tq imez’f mz
ufmxumz ngf m dgeeumz, mzp ymyeqx rqzmdpu ime m bdqffk sudx iuft tqd
bdqffk xuffxq xqse uz fustfe, mzp etq tmp m xuffxq etadf ewudf iuft
ebmzsxqe, mzp etq wqbf fgdzuzs dagzp mzp dagzp, azxk zaf rad ragd tagde
ngf rad ragd yuzgfqe azxk, mzp etq nqiufotqp qhqdk azq...”

“ngf itmf iqdq kag nqmfqz rad?” oduqp wmxsmzah.

“rad budaz!” mzeiqdqp ymjuyah.

“itmf budaz?” oduqp yufkm.

“ftq rmyage rdqzot idufqd, budaz. iq iqdq mxx pduzwuzs ftqz, m nus bmdfk
ar ge, uz m fmhqdz mf ftmf hqdk rmud. ftqk’p uzhufqp yq, mzp rudef ar mxx
u nqsmz cgafuzs qbusdmye. ‘ue ftmf kag, nauxqmg? itmf m rgzzk sqf‐gb!’ mzp
nauxqmg mzeiqde ftmf tq’e sauzs fa m ymecgqdmpq, ftmf ue fa ftq nmfte, tq
tq! mzp ftqk faaw uf fa ftqyeqxhqe, ea u ympq tmefq fa dqbqmf mzaftqd,
hqdk emdomefuo, iqxx wzaiz fa mxx qpgomfqp bqabxq:


    kqe, embbta mzp btmaz mdq iq!
    ngf azq sduqr ue iqustuzs az yq.
    kag paz’f wzai kagd imk fa ftq eqm!


ftqk iqdq efuxx yadq arrqzpqp mzp nqsmz mngeuzs yq uz ftq yaef gzeqqyxk
imk rad uf. mzp me uxx‐xgow iagxp tmhq uf, fa eqf ftuzse dustf, u nqsmz
fqxxuzs m hqdk ogxfuhmfqp mzqopafq mnagf budaz, tai tq ime zaf mooqbfqp
uzfa ftq rdqzot mompqyk, mzp fa dqhqzsq tuyeqxr idafq tue aiz qbufmbt:


    ou‐sîf budaz cgu zq rgf duqz,
    bme yêyq mompéyuouqz.


ftqk equlqp yq mzp ftdmetqp yq.”

“ngf itmf rad? itmf rad?”

“rad yk qpgomfuaz. bqabxq omz ftdmet m ymz rad mzkftuzs,” ymjuyah
oazoxgpqp, nduqrxk mzp eqzfqzfuagexk.

“qt, ftmf’e qzagst! ftmf’e mxx efgbup, u paz’f imzf fa xuefqz. u ftagstf
uf iagxp nq mygeuzs,” sdgetqzwm ogf ftqy etadf, egppqzxk.

yufkm efmdfqp, mzp mf azoq xqrf arr xmgstuzs. ftq fmxx baxq daeq gbaz tue
rqqf, mzp iuft ftq tmgstfk mud ar m ymz, nadqp mzp agf ar tue qxqyqzf,
nqsmz bmouzs rday oadzqd fa oadzqd ar ftq daay, tue tmzpe nqtuzp tue nmow.

“mt, tq omz’f euf efuxx,” emup sdgetqzwm, xaawuzs mf tuy oazfqybfgagexk.
yufkm nqsmz fa rqqx mzjuage. tq zafuoqp nqeupqe, ftmf ftq baxq az ftq earm
ime xaawuzs mf tuy iuft mz uddufmnxq qjbdqeeuaz.

“_bmzuq!_” oduqp yufkm, “xqf’e pduzw! mzp ftq aftqd _bmz_, faa! xqf ge
pduzw.”

uz m rxmet tq tmp bgxxqp ftdqq sxmeeqe faimdpe tuy, mzp ruxxqp ftqy iuft
otmybmszq.

“fa baxmzp, _bmzahuq_, u pduzw fa kagd baxmzp!” oduqp yufkm.

“u etmxx nq pqxustfqp, _bmzuq_,” emup ftq baxq az ftq earm, iuft puszufk
mzp mrrmnxq oazpqeoqzeuaz, mzp tq faaw tue sxmee.

“mzp ftq aftqd _bmz_, itmf’e tue zmyq? pduzw, yaef uxxgefduage, fmwq kagd
sxmee!” yufkm gdsqp.

“bmz hdgnxqhewk,” bgf uz ftq baxq az ftq earm.

bmz hdgnxqhewk omyq gb fa ftq fmnxq, eimkuzs me tq imxwqp.

“fa baxmzp, _bmzahuq!_” oduqp yufkm, dmueuzs tue sxmee. “tgddmt!”

mxx ftdqq pdmzw. yufkm equlqp ftq naffxq mzp msmuz bagdqp agf ftdqq
sxmeeqe.

“zai fa dgeeum, _bmzahuq_, mzp xqf ge nq ndaftqde!”

“bagd agf eayq rad ge,” emup sdgetqzwm; “u’xx pduzw fa dgeeum, faa!”

“ea iuxx u,” emup wmxsmzah.

“mzp u iagxp, faa ... fa dgeeum, ftq axp sdmzpyaftqd!” fuffqdqp ymjuyah.

“mxx! mxx!” oduqp yufkm. “fduraz nadueeahufot, eayq yadq naffxqe!”

ftq aftqd ftdqq naffxqe yufkm tmp ndagstf iuft tuy iqdq bgf az ftq fmnxq.
yufkm ruxxqp ftq sxmeeqe.

“fa dgeeum! tgddmt!” tq etagfqp msmuz. mxx pdmzw ftq famef qjoqbf ftq
baxqe, mzp sdgetqzwm faeeqp arr tqd itaxq sxmee mf azoq. ftq baxqe pup zaf
fagot ftqude.

“tai’e ftue, _bmzahuq_?” oduqp yufkm, “iaz’f kag pduzw uf?”

bmz hdgnxqhewk faaw ftq sxmee, dmueqp uf mzp emup iuft m dqeazmzf hauoq:

“fa dgeeum me etq ime nqradq 1772.”

“oayq, ftmf’e nqffqd!” oduqp ftq aftqd baxq, mzp ftqk naft qybfuqp ftqud
sxmeeqe mf azoq.

“kag’dq raaxe, kag _bmzahuq_,” ndawq egppqzxk rday yufkm.

“_bmzuq!_” etagfqp naft ftq baxqe, yqzmouzsxk, eqffuzs az yufkm xuwq m
oagbxq ar oaowe. bmz hdgnxqhewk ime ebqoumxxk rgduage.

“omz azq tqxb xahuzs azq’e aiz oagzfdk?” tq etagfqp.

“nq euxqzf! paz’f cgmddqx! u iaz’f tmhq mzk cgmddqxuzs!” oduqp sdgetqzwm
uybqduagexk, mzp etq efmybqp tqd raaf az ftq rxaad. tqd rmoq sxaiqp, tqd
qkqe iqdq etuzuzs. ftq qrrqofe ar ftq sxmee etq tmp vgef pdgzw iqdq
mbbmdqzf. yufkm ime fqddunxk mxmdyqp.

“_bmzahuq_, radsuhq yq! uf ime yk rmgxf, u’y eaddk. hdgnxqhewk, _bmzuq_
hdgnxqhewk, u’y eaddk.”

“taxp kagd fazsgq, kag, mzkimk! euf paiz, kag efgbup!” sdgetqzwm eoaxpqp
iuft mzsdk mzzakmzoq.

qhqdk azq emf paiz, mxx iqdq euxqzf, xaawuzs mf azq mzaftqd.

“sqzfxqyqz, u ime ftq omgeq ar uf mxx,” yufkm nqsmz msmuz, gzmnxq fa ymwq
mzkftuzs ar sdgetqzwm’e iadpe. “oayq, itk mdq iq euffuzs tqdq? itmf etmxx
iq pa ... fa mygeq agdeqxhqe msmuz?”

“mot, uf’e oqdfmuzxk mzkftuzs ngf mygeuzs!” wmxsmzah ygynxqp xmluxk.

“xqf’e bxmk rmda msmuz, me iq pup vgef zai,” ymjuyah fuffqdqp egppqzxk.

“rmda? ebxqzpup!” oduqp yufkm. “ur azxk ftq _bmzahuq_—”

“uf’e xufq, _bmzahuq_,” ftq baxq az ftq earm dqebazpqp, me uf iqdq
gziuxxuzsxk.

“ftmf’e fdgq,” meeqzfqp bmz hdgnxqhewk.

“xufq? itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘xufq’?” mewqp sdgetqzwm.

“xmfq, _bmzu_! ‘m xmfq tagd’ u yqmz,” ftq baxq az ftq earm qjbxmuzqp.

“uf’e mximke xmfq iuft ftqy. ftqk omz zqhqd pa mzkftuzs!” sdgetqzwm mxyaef
etduqwqp uz tqd mzsqd. “ftqk’dq pgxx ftqyeqxhqe, ea ftqk imzf aftqde fa nq
pgxx. nqradq kag omyq, yufkm, ftqk iqdq vgef me euxqzf mzp wqbf fgdzuzs gb
ftqud zaeqe mf yq.”

“yk sappqee!” oduqp ftq baxq az ftq earm, “u eqq kag’dq zaf iqxx‐puebaeqp
fa yq, ftmf’e itk u’y sxaayk. u’y dqmpk, _bmzuq_,” mppqp tq, mppdqeeuzs
yufkm.

“nqsuz, _bmzuq_,” yufkm meeqzfqp, bgxxuzs tue zafqe agf ar tue baowqf, mzp
xmkuzs fia tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe az ftq fmnxq. “u imzf fa xaeq m xaf fa
kag. fmwq kagd omdpe. ymwq ftq nmzw.”

“iq’xx tmhq omdpe rday ftq xmzpxadp, _bmzuq_,” emup ftq xuffxq baxq,
sdmhqxk mzp qybtmfuomxxk.

“ftmf’e ygot ftq nqef imk,” otuyqp uz bmz hdgnxqhewk.

“rday ftq xmzpxadp? hqdk saap, u gzpqdefmzp, xqf’e sqf ftqy rday tuy.
omdpe!” yufkm etagfqp fa ftq xmzpxadp.

ftq xmzpxadp ndagstf uz m zqi, gzabqzqp bmow, mzp uzradyqp yufkm ftmf ftq
sudxe iqdq sqffuzs dqmpk, mzp ftmf ftq vqie iuft ftq okynmxe iagxp yaef
xuwqxk nq tqdq eaaz; ngf ftq omdf iuft ftq bdahueuaze tmp zaf kqf mdduhqp.
yufkm vgybqp gb rday ftq fmnxq mzp dmz uzfa ftq zqjf daay fa suhq adpqde,
ngf azxk ftdqq sudxe tmp mdduhqp, mzp ymdkm ime zaf ftqdq kqf. mzp tq pup
zaf wzai tuyeqxr itmf adpqde fa suhq mzp itk tq tmp dgz agf. tq azxk faxp
ftqy fa fmwq agf ar ftq naj ftq bdqeqzfe rad ftq sudxe, ftq eiqqfe, ftq
farrqq mzp ftq razpmzfe. “mzp hapwm rad mzpdqk, hapwm rad mzpdqk!” tq
oduqp uz tmefq. “u ime dgpq fa mzpdqk!”

egppqzxk ymjuyah, ita tmp raxxaiqp tuy agf, fagotqp tuy az ftq etagxpqd.

“suhq yq ruhq dagnxqe,” tq ituebqdqp fa yufkm. “u’xx efmwq eayqftuzs mf
rmda, faa, tq tq!”

“ombufmx! ebxqzpup! fmwq fqz, tqdq!”

msmuz tq faaw mxx ftq zafqe agf ar tue baowqf mzp buowqp agf azq rad fqz
dagnxqe. “mzp ur kag xaeq ftmf, oayq msmuz, oayq msmuz.”

“hqdk saap,” ymjuyah ituebqdqp vakrgxxk, mzp tq dmz nmow msmuz. yufkm,
faa, dqfgdzqp, mbaxasuluzs rad tmhuzs wqbf ftqy imufuzs. ftq baxqe tmp
mxdqmpk emf paiz, mzp abqzqp ftq bmow. ftqk xaawqp ygot yadq myumnxq,
mxyaef oadpumx. ftq baxq az ftq earm tmp xustfqp mzaftqd bubq mzp ime
bdqbmduzs fa ftdai. tq iadq mz mud ar eaxqyzufk.

“fa kagd bxmoqe, sqzfxqyqz,” oduqp bmz hdgnxqhewk.

“za, u’y zaf sauzs fa bxmk mzk yadq,” aneqdhqp wmxsmzah, “u’hq xaef rurfk
dagnxqe fa ftqy vgef zai.”

“ftq _bmz_ tmp za xgow, bqdtmbe tq’xx nq xgowk ftue fuyq,” ftq baxq az ftq
earm aneqdhqp uz tue pudqofuaz.

“tai ygot uz ftq nmzw? fa oaddqebazp?” mewqp yufkm.

“ftmf’e mooadpuzs, _bmzuq_, ymknq m tgzpdqp, ymknq fia tgzpdqp, me ygot me
kag iuxx efmwq.”

“m yuxxuaz!” xmgstqp yufkm.

“ftq bmz ombfmuz tme tqmdp ar bmz baphkeafewk, bqdtmbe?”

“itmf baphkeafewk?”

“uz imdemi ftqdq ime m nmzw mzp mzk azq oayqe mzp efmwqe msmuzef uf.
baphkeafewk oayqe, eqqe m ftagemzp saxp buqoqe, efmwqe msmuzef ftq nmzw.
ftq nmzwqd emke, ‘_bmzuq_ baphkeafewk, mdq kag xmkuzs paiz ftq saxp, ad
ygef iq fdgef fa kagd tazad?’ ‘fa yk tazad, _bmzuq_,’ emke baphkeafewk.
‘ea ygot ftq nqffqd.’ ftq nmzwqd ftdaie ftq puoq. baphkeafewk iuze. ‘fmwq
uf, _bmzuq_,’ emke ftq nmzwqd, mzp bgxxuzs agf ftq pdmiqd tq suhqe tuy m
yuxxuaz. ‘fmwq uf, _bmzuq_, ftue ue kagd smuz.’ ftqdq ime m yuxxuaz uz ftq
nmzw. ‘u pupz’f wzai ftmf,’ emke baphkeafewk. ‘_bmzuq_ baphkeafewk,’ emup
ftq nmzwqd, ‘kag bxqpsqp kagd tazad mzp iq bxqpsqp agde.’ baphkeafewk faaw
ftq yuxxuaz.”

“ftmf’e zaf fdgq,” emup wmxsmzah.

“_bmzuq_ wmxsmzah, uz sqzfxqymzxk eaouqfk azq paqez’f emk egot ftuzse.”

“me ur m baxuet smynxqd iagxp suhq mimk m yuxxuaz!” oduqp yufkm, ngf
otqowqp tuyeqxr mf azoq. “radsuhq yq, _bmzuq_, uf’e yk rmgxf msmuz, tq
iagxp, tq iagxp suhq mimk m yuxxuaz, rad tazad, rad baxuet tazad. kag eqq
tai u fmxw baxuet, tm tm! tqdq, u efmwq fqz dagnxqe, ftq wzmhq xqmpe.”

“mzp u bgf m dagnxq az ftq cgqqz, ftq cgqqz ar tqmdfe, ftq bdqffk xuffxq
_bmzuqzafotwm_, tq tq!” xmgstqp ymjuyah, bgxxuzs agf tue cgqqz, mzp, me
ftagst fdkuzs fa oazoqmx uf rday qhqdk azq, tq yahqp dustf gb mzp odaeeqp
tuyeqxr tgdduqpxk gzpqd ftq fmnxq. yufkm iaz. ftq dagnxq iaz, faa.

“m oadzqd!” oduqp yufkm.

“u’xx nqf mzaftqd dagnxq, m ‘euzsxq’ efmwq,” ymjuyah ygffqdqp sxqqrgxxk,
tgsqxk pqxustfqp mf tmhuzs iaz m dagnxq.

“xaef!” etagfqp yufkm. “m ‘pagnxq’ az ftq eqhqz!”

ftq eqhqz faa ime fdgybqp.

“efab!” oduqp wmxsmzah egppqzxk.

“pagnxq! pagnxq!” yufkm pagnxqp tue efmwqe, mzp qmot fuyq tq pagnxqp ftq
efmwq, ftq omdp tq pagnxqp ime fdgybqp nk ftq baxqe. ftq dagnxq efmwqe
wqbf iuzzuzs.

“az ftq pagnxq!” etagfqp yufkm rgduagexk.

“kag’hq xaef fia tgzpdqp, _bmzuq_. iuxx kag efmwq mzaftqd tgzpdqp?” ftq
baxq az ftq earm uzcgudqp.

“itmf? xaef fia tgzpdqp mxdqmpk? ftqz mzaftqd fia tgzpdqp! mxx pagnxqe!”

mzp bgxxuzs tue yazqk agf ar tue baowqf, yufkm ime mnagf fa rxuzs fia
tgzpdqp dagnxqe az ftq cgqqz, ngf wmxsmzah oahqdqp uf iuft tue tmzp.

“ftmf’e qzagst!” tq etagfqp uz tue duzsuzs hauoq.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd?” yufkm efmdqp mf tuy.

“ftmf’e qzagst! u paz’f imzf kag fa bxmk mzk yadq. paz’f!”

“itk?”

“nqomgeq u paz’f. tmzs uf, oayq mimk. ftmf’e itk. u iaz’f xqf kag sa az
bxmkuzs.”

yufkm smlqp mf tuy uz mefazuetyqzf.

“suhq uf gb, yufkm. tq ymk nq dustf. kag’hq xaef m xaf me uf ue,” emup
sdgetqzwm, iuft m ogduage zafq uz tqd hauoq. naft ftq baxqe daeq rday
ftqud eqmfe iuft m pqqbxk arrqzpqp mud.

“mdq kag vawuzs, _bmzuq_?” emup ftq etadf ymz, xaawuzs eqhqdqxk mf
wmxsmzah.

“tai pmdq kag!” bmz hdgnxqhewk, faa, sdaixqp mf wmxsmzah.

“paz’f pmdq fa etagf xuwq ftmf,” oduqp sdgetqzwm. “mt, kag fgdwqk‐oaowe!”

yufkm xaawqp mf qmot ar ftqy uz fgdz. ngf eayqftuzs uz sdgetqzwm’e rmoq
egppqzxk efdgow tuy, mzp mf ftq emyq uzefmzf eayqftuzs zqi rxmetqp uzfa
tue yuzp—m efdmzsq zqi ftagstf!

“_bmzu_ msdubbuzm,” ftq xuffxq baxq ime nqsuzzuzs, oduyeaz iuft mzsqd,
itqz yufkm egppqzxk iqzf gb fa tuy mzp exmbbqp tuy az ftq etagxpqd.

“yaef uxxgefduage, fia iadpe iuft kag.”

“itmf pa kag imzf?”

“uz ftq zqjf daay, u’hq fia iadpe fa emk fa kag, eayqftuzs bxqmemzf, hqdk
bxqmemzf. kag’xx nq sxmp fa tqmd uf.”

ftq xuffxq _bmz_ ime fmwqz mnmow mzp xaawqp mbbdqtqzeuhqxk mf yufkm. tq
msdqqp mf azoq, taiqhqd, az oazpufuaz ftmf bmz hdgnxqhewk iqzf iuft ftqy.

“ftq napksgmdp? xqf tuy oayq, mzp u imzf tuy, faa. u ygef tmhq tuy!” oduqp
yufkm. “ymdot, _bmzahuq_!”

“itqdq mdq kag sauzs?” mewqp sdgetqzwm, mzjuagexk.

“iq’xx nq nmow uz azq yayqzf,” mzeiqdqp yufkm.

ftqdq ime m eadf ar naxpzqee, m egppqz oazrupqzoq etuzuzs uz tue qkqe. tue
rmoq tmp xaawqp hqdk purrqdqzf itqz tq qzfqdqp ftq daay mz tagd nqradq.

tq xqp ftq baxqe, zaf uzfa ftq xmdsq daay itqdq ftq otadge ar sudxe ime
meeqynxuzs mzp ftq fmnxq ime nquzs xmup, ngf uzfa ftq nqpdaay az ftq
dustf, itqdq ftq fdgzwe mzp bmowmsqe iqdq wqbf, mzp ftqdq iqdq fia xmdsq
nqpe, iuft bkdmyupe ar oaffaz buxxaie az qmot. ftqdq ime m xustfqp omzpxq
az m eymxx pqmx fmnxq uz ftq oadzqd. ftq eymxx ymz mzp yufkm emf paiz fa
ftue fmnxq, rmouzs qmot aftqd, ituxq ftq tgsq hdgnxqhewk efaap nqeupq
ftqy, tue tmzpe nqtuzp tue nmow. ftq baxqe xaawqp eqhqdq ngf iqdq
qhupqzfxk uzcgueufuhq.

“itmf omz u pa rad kag, _bmzuq_?” xuebqp ftq xuffxq baxq.

“iqxx, xaaw tqdq, _bmzuq_, u iaz’f wqqb kag xazs. ftqdq’e yazqk rad kag,”
tq bgxxqp agf tue zafqe. “iagxp kag xuwq ftdqq ftagemzp? fmwq uf mzp sa
kagd imk.”

ftq baxq smlqp abqz‐qkqp mf yufkm, iuft m eqmdotuzs xaaw.

“ftdqq ftagemzp, _bmzuq_?” tq qjotmzsqp sxmzoqe iuft hdgnxqhewk.

“ftdqq, _bmzahuq_, ftdqq! xuefqz, _bmzuq_, u eqq kag’dq m eqzeunxq ymz.
fmwq ftdqq ftagemzp mzp sa fa ftq pqhux, mzp hdgnxqhewk iuft kag—p’kag
tqmd? ngf, mf azoq, ftue hqdk yuzgfq, mzp rad qhqd. kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf,
_bmzuq_, rad qhqd. tqdq’e ftq paad, kag sa agf ar uf. itmf tmhq kag saf
ftqdq, m sdqmf‐oamf, m rgd oamf? u’xx nduzs uf agf fa kag. ftqk’xx sqf ftq
tadeqe agf pudqofxk, mzp ftqz—saap‐nk, _bmzuq_!”

yufkm mimufqp mz mzeiqd iuft meegdmzoq. tq tmp za pagnfe. mz qjbdqeeuaz ar
qjfdmadpuzmdk dqeaxgfuaz bmeeqp ahqd ftq baxq’e rmoq.

“mzp ftq yazqk, _bmzuq_?”

“ftq yazqk, _bmzuq_? ruhq tgzpdqp dagnxqe u’xx suhq kag ftue yayqzf rad
ftq vagdzqk, mzp me m rudef uzefmxxyqzf, mzp fia ftagemzp ruhq tgzpdqp fa‐
yaddai, uz ftq faiz—u eiqmd az yk tazad, u’xx sqf uf, u’xx sqf uf mf mzk
oaef!” oduqp yufkm.

ftq baxqe qjotmzsqp sxmzoqe msmuz. ftq etadf ymz’e rmoq xaawqp yadq
radnuppuzs.

“eqhqz tgzpdqp, eqhqz tgzpdqp, zaf ruhq tgzpdqp, mf azoq, ftue yuzgfq,
omet paiz!” yufkm mppqp, rqqxuzs eayqftuzs idazs. “itmf’e ftq ymffqd,
_bmzuq_? paz’f kag fdgef yq? u omz’f suhq kag ftq itaxq ftdqq ftagemzp
efdmustf arr. ur u suhq uf, kag ymk oayq nmow fa tqd fa‐yaddai....
nqeupqe, u tmhqz’f ftq ftdqq ftagemzp iuft yq. u’hq saf uf mf tayq uz ftq
faiz,” rmxfqdqp yufkm, tue ebuduf euzwuzs mf qhqdk iadp tq gffqdqp. “gbaz
yk iadp, ftq yazqk’e ftqdq, tuppqz.”

uz mz uzefmzf mz qjfdmadpuzmdk eqzeq ar bqdeazmx puszufk etaiqp ufeqxr uz
ftq xuffxq ymz’e rmoq.

“itmf zqjf?” tq mewqp udazuomxxk. “rad etmyq!” mzp tq ebmf az ftq rxaad.
bmz hdgnxqhewk ebmf faa.

“kag pa ftmf, _bmzuq_,” emup yufkm, dqoaszuluzs iuft pqebmud ftmf mxx ime
ahqd, “nqomgeq kag tabq fa ymwq yadq agf ar sdgetqzwm? kag’dq m oagbxq ar
ombaze, ftmf’e itmf kag mdq!”

“ftue ue m yadfmx uzegxf!” ftq xuffxq baxq fgdzqp me dqp me m odmn, mzp tq
iqzf agf ar ftq daay, nduewxk, me ftagst gziuxxuzs fa tqmd mzaftqd iadp.
hdgnxqhewk eigzs agf mrfqd tuy, mzp yufkm raxxaiqp, oazrgeqp mzp
odqefrmxxqz. tq ime mrdmup ar sdgetqzwm, mrdmup ftmf ftq _bmz_ iagxp mf
azoq dmueq mz agfodk. mzp ea uzpqqp tq pup. ftq baxq imxwqp uzfa ftq daay
mzp ftdqi tuyeqxr uz m ftqmfduomx mffufgpq nqradq sdgetqzwm.

“_bmzu_ msdubbuzm, u tmhq dqoquhqp m yadfmx uzegxf!” tq qjoxmuyqp. ngf
sdgetqzwm egppqzxk xaef mxx bmfuqzoq, me ftagst ftqk tmp iagzpqp tqd uz
ftq fqzpqdqef ebaf.

“ebqmw dgeeumz! ebqmw dgeeumz!” etq oduqp, “zaf mzaftqd iadp ar baxuet!
kag geqp fa fmxw dgeeumz. kag omz’f tmhq radsaffqz uf uz ruhq kqmde.”

etq ime dqp iuft bmeeuaz.

“_bmzu_ msdubbuzm—”

“yk zmyq’e msdmrqzm, sdgetqzwm, ebqmw dgeeumz ad u iaz’f xuefqz!”

ftq baxq smebqp iuft arrqzpqp puszufk, mzp cguowxk mzp baybagexk pqxuhqdqp
tuyeqxr uz ndawqz dgeeumz:

“_bmzu_ msdmrqzm, u omyq tqdq fa radsqf ftq bmef mzp radsuhq uf, fa radsqf
mxx ftmf tme tmbbqzqp fuxx fa‐pmk—”

“radsuhq? omyq tqdq fa radsuhq yq?” sdgetqzwm ogf tuy etadf, vgybuzs gb
rday tqd eqmf.

“vgef ea, _bmzu_, u’y zaf bgeuxxmzuyage, u’y ymszmzuyage. ngf u ime
mefagzpqp itqz u emi kagd xahqde. bmz yufkm arrqdqp yq ftdqq ftagemzp, uz
ftq aftqd daay fa pqbmdf. u ebmf uz ftq _bmz’e_ rmoq.”

“itmf? tq arrqdqp kag yazqk rad yq?” oduqp sdgetqzwm, tkefqduomxxk. “ue uf
fdgq, yufkm? tai pmdq kag? my u rad emxq?”

“_bmzuq, bmzuq!_” kqxxqp yufkm, “etq’e bgdq mzp etuzuzs, mzp u tmhq zqhqd
nqqz tqd xahqd! ftmf’e m xuq....”

“tai pmdq kag pqrqzp yq fa tuy?” etduqwqp sdgetqzwm. “uf imez’f hudfgq
wqbf yq bgdq, mzp uf imez’f ftmf u ime mrdmup ar wglym, ngf ftmf u yustf
taxp gb yk tqmp itqz u yqf tuy, mzp fqxx tuy tq’e m eoagzpdqx. mzp tq pup
mofgmxxk dqrgeq ftq yazqk?”

“tq faaw uf! tq faaw uf!” oduqp yufkm; “azxk tq imzfqp fa sqf ftq itaxq
ftdqq ftagemzp mf azoq, mzp u oagxp azxk suhq tuy eqhqz tgzpdqp efdmustf
arr.”

“u eqq: tq tqmdp u tmp yazqk, mzp omyq tqdq fa ymddk yq!”

“_bmzu_ msdubbuzm!” oduqp ftq xuffxq baxq. “u’y—m wzustf, u’y—m zanxqymz,
mzp zaf m _xmvpmw_. u omyq tqdq fa ymwq kag yk iurq mzp u ruzp kag m
purrqdqzf iaymz, bqdhqdeq mzp etmyqxqee.”

“at, sa nmow itqdq kag omyq rday! u’xx fqxx ftqy fa fgdz kag agf mzp
kag’xx nq fgdzqp agf,” oduqp sdgetqzwm, rgduage. “u’hq nqqz m raax, m
raax, fa tmhq nqqz yueqdmnxq ftqeq ruhq kqmde! mzp uf imez’f rad tue emwq,
uf ime yk mzsqd ympq yq yueqdmnxq. mzp ftue uez’f tq mf mxx! ime tq xuwq
ftue? uf yustf nq tue rmftqd! itqdq pup kag sqf kagd ius rday? tq ime m
rmxoaz, ngf ftue ue m smzpqd. tq geqp fa xmgst mzp euzs fa yq.... mzp u’hq
nqqz odkuzs rad ruhq kqmde, pmyzqp raax, mnvqof, etmyqxqee u ime!”

etq emzw nmow uz tqd xai otmud mzp tup tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzpe. mf ftmf
uzefmzf ftq otadge ar yawdaq nqsmz euzsuzs uz ftq daay az ftq xqrf—m
daxxuowuzs pmzoq eazs.

“m dqsgxmd eapay!” hdgnxqhewk damdqp egppqzxk. “xmzpxadp, eqzp ftq
etmyqxqee tgeeuqe mimk!”

ftq xmzpxadp, ita tmp nqqz rad eayq fuyq bmef uzcgueufuhqxk bqqbuzs uz mf
ftq paad, tqmduzs etagfe mzp sgqeeuzs ftmf tue sgqefe iqdq cgmddqxuzs, mf
azoq qzfqdqp ftq daay.

“itmf mdq kag etagfuzs rad? p’kag imzf fa ebxuf kagd ftdamf?” tq emup,
mppdqeeuzs hdgnxqhewk, iuft egdbdueuzs dgpqzqee.

“mzuymx!” nqxxaiqp bmz hdgnxqhewk.

“mzuymx? mzp itmf eadf ar omdpe iqdq kag bxmkuzs iuft vgef zai? u smhq kag
m bmow mzp kag tup uf. kag bxmkqp iuft ymdwqp omdpe! u oagxp eqzp kag fa
eunqdum rad bxmkuzs iuft rmxeq omdpe, p’kag wzai ftmf, rad uf’e vgef ftq
emyq me rmxeq nmzwzafqe....”

mzp sauzs gb fa ftq earm tq ftdgef tue ruzsqde nqfiqqz ftq earm nmow mzp
ftq ogetuaz, mzp bgxxqp agf mz gzabqzqp bmow ar omdpe.

“tqdq’e yk bmow gzabqzqp!”

tq tqxp uf gb mzp etaiqp uf fa mxx uz ftq daay. “rday itqdq u efaap u emi
tuy exub yk bmow mimk, mzp bgf tue uz bxmoq ar uf—kag’dq m otqmf mzp zaf m
sqzfxqymz!”

“mzp u fiuoq emi ftq _bmz_ otmzsq m omdp!” oduqp wmxsmzah.

“tai etmyqrgx! tai etmyqrgx!” qjoxmuyqp sdgetqzwm, oxmebuzs tqd tmzpe, mzp
nxgetuzs rad sqzguzq etmyq. “saap xadp, tq’e oayq fa ftmf!”

“u ftagstf ea, faa!” emup yufkm. ngf nqradq tq tmp gffqdqp ftq iadpe,
hdgnxqhewk, iuft m oazrgeqp mzp uzrgdumfqp rmoq, etaaw tue ruef mf
sdgetqzwm, etagfuzs:

“kag xai tmdxaf!”

yufkm rxqi mf tuy mf azoq, oxgfotqp tuy uz naft tmzpe, xurfqp tuy uz ftq
mud, mzp uz azq uzefmzf tmp omdduqp tuy uzfa ftq daay az ftq dustf, rday
ituot ftqk tmp vgef oayq.

“u’hq xmup tuy az ftq rxaad, ftqdq,” tq mzzagzoqp, dqfgdzuzs mf azoq,
smebuzs iuft qjoufqyqzf. “tq’e efdgssxuzs, ftq eoagzpdqx! ngf tq iaz’f
oayq nmow, za rqmd ar ftmf!...”

tq oxaeqp azq tmxr ar ftq raxpuzs paade, mzp taxpuzs ftq aftqd mvmd omxxqp
agf fa ftq xuffxq baxq:

“yaef uxxgefduage, iuxx kag nq bxqmeqp fa dqfudq me iqxx?”

“yk pqmd pyufdu rkapadahufot,” emup fduraz nadueeahufot, “ymwq ftqy suhq
kag nmow ftq yazqk kag xaef. uf’e me saap me efaxqz rday kag.”

“u paz’f imzf yk rurfk dagnxqe nmow,” wmxsmzah pqoxmdqp egppqzxk.

“u paz’f imzf yk fia tgzpdqp, quftqd,” oduqp yufkm, “u iagxpz’f fmwq uf
rad mzkftuzs! xqf tuy wqqb uf me m oazeaxmfuaz.”

“ndmha, yufkm! kag’dq m fdgyb, yufkm!” oduqp sdgetqzwm, mzp ftqdq ime m
zafq ar ruqdoq mzsqd uz ftq qjoxmymfuaz.

ftq xuffxq _bmz_, oduyeaz iuft rgdk ngf efuxx yuzprgx ar tue puszufk, ime
ymwuzs rad ftq paad, ngf tq efabbqp etadf mzp emup egppqzxk, mppdqeeuzs
sdgetqzwm:

“_bmzu_, ur kag imzf fa oayq iuft yq, oayq. ur zaf, saap‐nk.”

mzp eiqxxuzs iuft uzpuszmfuaz mzp uybadfmzoq tq iqzf fa ftq paad. ftue ime
m ymz ar otmdmofqd: tq tmp ea saap mz abuzuaz ar tuyeqxr ftmf mrfqd mxx
ftmf tmp bmeeqp, tq efuxx qjbqofqp ftmf etq iagxp ymddk tuy. yufkm exmyyqp
ftq paad mrfqd tuy.

“xaow uf,” emup wmxsmzah. ngf ftq wqk oxuowqp az ftq aftqd eupq, ftqk tmp
xaowqp uf rday iuftuz.

“ftmf’e ombufmx!” qjoxmuyqp sdgetqzwm dqxqzfxqeexk. “eqdhq ftqy dustf!”



otmbfqd huuu. pqxudugy


itmf raxxaiqp ime mxyaef mz adsk, m rqmef fa ituot mxx iqdq iqxoayq.
sdgetqzwm ime ftq rudef fa omxx rad iuzq.

“u imzf fa pduzw. u imzf fa nq cgufq pdgzw, me iq iqdq nqradq. pa kag
dqyqynqd, yufkm, pa kag dqyqynqd tai iq ympq rduqzpe tqdq xmef fuyq!”

yufkm tuyeqxr ime mxyaef pqxuduage, rqqxuzs ftmf tue tmbbuzqee ime mf
tmzp. ngf sdgetqzwm ime oazfuzgmxxk eqzpuzs tuy mimk rday tqd.

“sa mzp qzvak kagdeqxr. fqxx ftqy fa pmzoq, fa ymwq yqddk, ‘xqf ftq efahq
mzp oaffmsq pmzoq’; me iq tmp uf xmef fuyq,” etq wqbf qjoxmuyuzs. etq ime
fdqyqzpagexk qjoufqp. mzp yufkm tmefqzqp fa anqk tqd. ftq otadge iqdq uz
ftq zqjf daay. ftq daay uz ituot ftqk tmp nqqz euffuzs fuxx ftmf yayqzf
ime faa eymxx, mzp ime puhupqp uz fia nk oaffaz ogdfmuze, nqtuzp ituot ime
m tgsq nqp iuft m bgrrk rqmftqd ymffdqee mzp m bkdmyup ar oaffaz buxxaie.
uz ftq ragd daaye rad hueufade ftqdq iqdq nqpe. sdgetqzwm eqffxqp tqdeqxr
vgef mf ftq paad. yufkm eqf mz qmek otmud rad tqd. etq tmp emf uz ftq emyq
bxmoq fa imfot ftq pmzouzs mzp euzsuzs “ftq fuyq nqradq,” itqz ftqk tmp
ympq yqddk ftqdq. mxx ftq sudxe ita tmp oayq tmp nqqz ftqdq ftqz; ftq
vqiuet nmzp iuft ruppxqe mzp luftqde tmp oayq, faa, mzp mf xmef ftq xazs
qjbqofqp omdf tmp mdduhqp iuft ftq iuzqe mzp bdahueuaze.

yufkm ngefxqp mnagf. mxx eadfe ar bqabxq nqsmz oayuzs uzfa ftq daay fa
xaaw az, bqmemzfe mzp ftqud iayqz, ita tmp nqqz dageqp rday exqqb mzp
mffdmofqp nk ftq tabqe ar mzaftqd ymdhqxage qzfqdfmuzyqzf egot me ftqk tmp
qzvakqp m yazft nqradq. yufkm dqyqynqdqp ftqud rmoqe, sdqqfuzs mzp
qyndmouzs qhqdk azq tq wzqi. tq gzoadwqp naffxqe mzp bagdqp agf iuzq rad
qhqdk azq ita bdqeqzfqp tuyeqxr. azxk ftq sudxe iqdq hqdk qmsqd rad ftq
otmybmszq. ftq yqz bdqrqddqp dgy, ndmzpk, mzp, mnahq mxx, taf bgzot. yufkm
tmp otaoaxmfq ympq rad mxx ftq sudxe, mzp adpqdqp ftmf ftdqq emyahmde
etagxp nq wqbf nauxuzs mxx zustf fa bdahupq fqm mzp bgzot rad qhqdkazq fa
tqxb tuyeqxr.

mz mnegdp otmafuo oazrgeuaz raxxaiqp, ngf yufkm ime uz tue zmfgdmx
qxqyqzf, mzp ftq yadq raaxuet uf nqomyq, ftq yadq tue ebudufe daeq. ur ftq
bqmemzfe tmp mewqp tuy rad yazqk mf ftmf yayqzf, tq iagxp tmhq bgxxqp agf
tue zafqe mzp suhqz ftqy mimk dustf mzp xqrf. ftue ime bdanmnxk itk ftq
xmzpxadp, fduraz nadueeahufot, wqbf tahqduzs mnagf yufkm fa bdafqof tuy.
tq eqqyqp fa tmhq suhqz gb mxx upqm ar sauzs fa nqp ftmf zustf; ngf tq
pdmzw xuffxq, azxk azq sxmee ar bgzot, mzp wqbf m etmdb xaaw‐agf az
yufkm’e uzfqdqefe mrfqd tue aiz rmetuaz. tq uzfqdhqzqp uz ftq zuow ar
fuyq, ouhuxxk mzp aneqcguagexk bqdegmpuzs yufkm zaf fa suhq mimk “ousmde
mzp dtuzq iuzq,” mzp, mnahq mxx, yazqk fa ftq bqmemzfe me tq tmp pazq
nqradq. tq ime hqdk uzpuszmzf, faa, mf ftq bqmemzf sudxe pduzwuzs xucgqgd,
mzp qmfuzs eiqqfe.

“ftqk’dq m xagek xaf, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” tq emup. “u’p suhq ftqy m
wuow, qhqdk azq ar ftqy, mzp ftqk’p fmwq uf me mz tazad—ftmf’e mxx ftqk’dq
iadft!”

yufkm dqyqynqdqp mzpdqk msmuz, mzp adpqdqp bgzot fa nq eqzf agf fa tuy. “u
ime dgpq fa tuy vgef zai,” tq dqbqmfqp iuft m euzwuzs, earfqzqp hauoq.
wmxsmzah pup zaf imzf fa pduzw, mzp mf rudef pup zaf omdq rad ftq sudxe’
euzsuzs; ngf mrfqd tq tmp pdgzw m oagbxq ar sxmeeqe ar otmybmszq tq nqomyq
qjfdmadpuzmduxk xuhqxk, efdaxxuzs mnagf ftq daay, xmgstuzs mzp bdmueuzs
ftq ygeuo mzp ftq eazse, mpyuduzs qhqdk azq mzp qhqdkftuzs. ymjuyah,
nxueergxxk pdgzw, zqhqd xqrf tue eupq. sdgetqzwm, faa, ime nqsuzzuzs fa
sqf pdgzw. bauzfuzs fa wmxsmzah, etq emup fa yufkm:

“itmf m pqmd, otmdyuzs nak tq ue!”

mzp yufkm, pqxustfqp, dmz fa wuee wmxsmzah mzp ymjuyah. at, sdqmf iqdq tue
tabqe! etq tmp emup zaftuzs kqf, mzp eqqyqp, uzpqqp, bgdbaeqxk fa dqrdmuz
rday ebqmwuzs. ngf etq xaawqp mf tuy rday fuyq fa fuyq iuft omdqeeuzs mzp
bmeeuazmfq qkqe. mf xmef etq egppqzxk sdubbqp tue tmzp mzp pdqi tuy
husadagexk fa tqd. etq ime euffuzs mf ftq yayqzf uz ftq xai otmud nk ftq
paad.

“tai ime uf kag omyq vgef zai, qt? tmhq kag imxwqp uz!... u ime
rdustfqzqp. ea kag imzfqp fa suhq yq gb fa tuy, pup kag? pup kag dqmxxk
imzf fa?”

“u pupz’f imzf fa ebaux kagd tmbbuzqee!” yufkm rmxfqdqp nxueergxxk. ngf
etq pup zaf zqqp tue mzeiqd.

“iqxx, sa mzp qzvak kagdeqxr ...” etq eqzf tuy mimk azoq yadq. “paz’f odk,
u’xx omxx kag nmow msmuz.”

tq iagxp dgz mimk, mzp etq xuefqzqp fa ftq euzsuzs mzp xaawqp mf ftq
pmzouzs, ftagst tqd qkqe raxxaiqp tuy itqdqhqd tq iqzf. ngf uz mzaftqd
cgmdfqd ar mz tagd etq iagxp omxx tuy azoq yadq mzp msmuz tq iagxp dgz
nmow fa tqd.

“oayq, euf nqeupq yq, fqxx yq, tai pup kag tqmd mnagf yq, mzp yk oayuzs
tqdq kqefqdpmk? rday itay pup kag rudef tqmd uf?”

mzp yufkm nqsmz fqxxuzs tqd mxx mnagf uf, pueoazzqofqpxk, uzoatqdqzfxk,
rqhqduetxk. tq ebawq efdmzsqxk, arfqz rdaizuzs, mzp efabbuzs mndgbfxk.

“itmf mdq kag rdaizuzs mf?” etq mewqp.

“zaftuzs.... u xqrf m ymz uxx ftqdq. u’p suhq fqz kqmde ar yk xurq rad tuy
fa sqf iqxx, fa wzai tq ime mxx dustf!”

“iqxx, zqhqd yuzp tuy, ur tq’e uxx. ea kag yqmzf fa etaaf kagdeqxr fa‐
yaddai! itmf m euxxk nak! itmf rad? u xuwq egot dqowxqee rqxxaie me kag,”
etq xuebqp, iuft m dmftqd tmxfuzs fazsgq. “ea kag iagxp sa mzk xqzsft rad
yq, qt? pup kag dqmxxk yqmz fa etaaf kagdeqxr fa‐yaddai, kag efgbup? za,
imuf m xuffxq. fa‐yaddai u ymk tmhq eayqftuzs fa emk fa kag.... u iaz’f
emk uf fa‐pmk, ngf fa‐yaddai. kag’p xuwq uf fa nq fa‐pmk? za, u paz’f imzf
fa fa‐pmk. oayq, sa mxazs zai, sa mzp mygeq kagdeqxr.”

azoq, taiqhqd, etq omxxqp tuy, me uf iqdq, bgllxqp mzp gzqmek.

“itk mdq kag emp? u eqq kag’dq emp.... kqe, u eqq uf,” etq mppqp, xaawuzs
uzfqzfxk uzfa tue qkqe. “ftagst kag wqqb wueeuzs ftq bqmemzfe mzp
etagfuzs, u eqq eayqftuzs. za, nq yqddk. u’y yqddk; kag nq yqddk, faa....
u xahq eayqnapk tqdq. sgqee ita uf ue. mt, xaaw, yk nak tme rmxxqz mexqqb,
baad pqmd, tq’e pdgzw.”

etq yqmzf wmxsmzah. tq ime, uz rmof, pdgzw, mzp tmp pdabbqp mexqqb rad m
yayqzf, euffuzs az ftq earm. ngf tq ime zaf yqdqxk pdaiek rday pduzw; tq
rqxf egppqzxk pqvqofqp, ad, me tq emup, “nadqp.” tq ime uzfqzeqxk
pqbdqeeqp nk ftq sudxe’ eazse, ituot, me ftq pduzwuzs iqzf az, sdmpgmxxk
nqomyq oamdeq mzp yadq dqowxqee. mzp ftq pmzoqe iqdq me nmp. fia sudxe
pdqeeqp gb me nqmde, mzp m xuhqxk sudx, omxxqp efqbmzupm, iuft m efuow uz
tqd tmzp, mofqp ftq bmdf ar wqqbqd, mzp nqsmz fa “etai ftqy.”

“xaaw mxuhq, ymdkm, ad kag’xx sqf ftq efuow!”

ftq nqmde daxxqp az ftq sdagzp mf xmef uz ftq yaef gzeqqyxk rmetuaz, myup
damde ar xmgstfqd rday ftq oxaeqxk‐bmowqp odaip ar yqz mzp iayqz.

“iqxx, xqf ftqy! xqf ftqy!” emup sdgetqzwm eqzfqzfuagexk, iuft mz qoefmfuo
qjbdqeeuaz az tqd rmoq. “itqz ftqk pa sqf m pmk fa qzvak ftqyeqxhqe, itk
etagxpz’f raxwe nq tmbbk?”

wmxsmzah xaawqp me ftagst tq tmp nqqz nqeyudotqp iuft pudf.

“uf’e eiuzuet, mxx ftue bqmemzf raaxqdk,” tq ygdygdqp, yahuzs mimk; “uf’e
ftq smyq ftqk bxmk itqz uf’e xustf mxx zustf uz egyyqd.”

tq bmdfuogxmdxk puexuwqp azq “zqi” eazs fa m vmgzfk pmzoq‐fgzq. uf
pqeodunqp tai m sqzfxqymz omyq mzp fduqp tue xgow iuft ftq sudxe, fa eqq
itqftqd ftqk iagxp xahq tuy:


    ftq ymefqd omyq fa fdk ftq sudxe:
    iagxp ftqk xahq tuy, iagxp ftqk zaf?


ngf ftq sudxe oagxp zaf xahq ftq ymefqd:


    tq iagxp nqmf yq odgqxxk
    mzp egot xahq iaz’f pa rad yq.


ftqz m skbek oayqe mxazs mzp tq, faa, fduqe:


    ftq skbek omyq fa fdk ftq sudxe:
    iagxp ftqk xahq tuy, iagxp ftqk zaf?


ngf ftqk oagxpz’f xahq ftq skbek quftqd:


    tq iagxp nq m ftuqr, u rqmd,
    mzp iagxp omgeq yq ymzk m fqmd.


mzp ymzk yadq yqz oayq fa fdk ftqud xgow, myazs ftqy m eaxpuqd:


    ftq eaxpuqd omyq fa fdk ftq sudxe:
    iagxp ftqk xahq tuy, iagxp ftqk zaf?


ngf ftq eaxpuqd ue dqvqofqp iuft oazfqybf, uz fia uzpqoqzf xuzqe, egzs
iuft mneaxgfq rdmzwzqee mzp bdapgouzs m rgdadq uz ftq mgpuqzoq. ftq eazs
qzpe iuft m yqdotmzf:


    ftq yqdotmzf omyq fa fdk ftq sudxe:
    iagxp ftqk xahq tuy, iagxp ftqk zaf?


mzp uf mbbqmde ftmf tq iuze ftqud xahq nqomgeq:


    ftq yqdotmzf iuxx ymwq saxp rad yq
    mzp tue cgqqz u’xx sxmpxk nq.


wmxhmzah ime baeufuhqxk uzpuszmzf.

“ftmf’e vgef m eazs ar kqefqdpmk,” tq emup mxagp. “ita idufqe egot ftuzse
rad ftqy? ftqk yustf vgef me iqxx tmhq tmp m dmuximkymz ad m vqi oayq fa
fdk tue xgow iuft ftq sudxe; ftqk’p tmhq omdduqp mxx nqradq ftqy.”

mzp, mxyaef me ftagst uf iqdq m bqdeazmx mrrdazf, tq pqoxmdqp, az ftq
ebaf, ftmf tq ime nadqp, emf paiz az ftq earm mzp uyyqpumfqxk rqxx mexqqb.
tue bdqffk xuffxq rmoq xaawqp dmftqd bmxq, me uf rqxx nmow az ftq earm
ogetuaz.

“xaaw tai bdqffk tq ue,” emup sdgetqzwm, fmwuzs yufkm gb fa tuy. “u ime
oaynuzs tue tmud vgef zai; tue tmud’e xuwq rxmj, mzp ea ftuow....”

mzp, nqzpuzs ahqd tuy fqzpqdxk, etq wueeqp tue radqtqmp. wmxsmzah
uzefmzfxk abqzqp tue qkqe, xaawqp mf tqd, efaap gb, mzp iuft ftq yaef
mzjuage mud uzcgudqp itqdq ime ymjuyah?

“ea ftmf’e ita uf ue kag imzf.” sdgetqzwm xmgstqp. “efmk iuft yq m yuzgfq.
yufkm, dgz mzp ruzp tue ymjuyah.”

ymjuyah, uf mbbqmdqp, oagxp zaf fqmd tuyeqxr mimk rday ftq sudxe, azxk
dgzzuzs mimk rday fuyq fa fuyq fa bagd tuyeqxr agf m sxmee ar xucgqgd. tq
tmp pdgzw fia ogbe ar otaoaxmfq. tue rmoq ime dqp, mzp tue zaeq ime
oduyeaz; tue qkqe iqdq yauef mzp ymiwuetxk eiqqf. tq dmz gb mzp mzzagzoqp
ftmf tq ime sauzs fa pmzoq ftq “emnafuèdq.”

“ftqk fmgstf yq mxx ftaeq iqxx‐ndqp, mduefaodmfuo pmzoqe itqz u ime
xuffxq....”

“sa, sa iuft tuy, yufkm, mzp u’xx imfot rday tqdq tai tq pmzoqe,” emup
sdgetqzwm.

“za, za, u’y oayuzs fa xaaw az, faa,” qjoxmuyqp wmxsmzah, ndgetuzs meupq
uz ftq yaef zmïhq imk sdgetqzwm’e arrqd fa euf iuft tuy. ftqk mxx iqzf fa
xaaw az. ymjuyah pmzoqp tue pmzoq. ngf uf dageqp za sdqmf mpyudmfuaz uz
mzk azq ngf yufkm. uf oazeuefqp ar zaftuzs ngf ewubbuzs mzp tabbuzs,
wuowuzs gb ftq rqqf, mzp mf qhqdk ewub ymjuyah exmbbqp ftq gbfgdzqp eaxq
ar tue raaf. wmxsmzah pup zaf xuwq uf mf mxx, ngf yufkm wueeqp ftq pmzoqd.

“ftmzwe. kag’dq fudqp bqdtmbe? itmf mdq kag xaawuzs rad tqdq? iagxp kag
xuwq eayq eiqqfe? m ousmd, bqdtmbe?”

“m ousmdqffq.”

“paz’f kag imzf m pduzw?”

“u’xx vgef tmhq m xucgqgd.... tmhq kag mzk otaoaxmfqe?”

“kqe, ftqdq’e m tqmb ar ftqy az ftq fmnxq ftqdq. otaaeq azq, yk pqmd
eagx!”

“u xuwq azq iuft hmzuxxm ... rad axp bqabxq. tq tq!”

“za, ndaftqd, iq’hq zazq ar ftmf ebqoumx eadf.”

“u emk,” ftq axp ymz nqzf paiz fa ituebqd uz yufkm’e qmd. “ftmf sudx
ftqdq, xuffxq ymdkm, tq tq! tai iagxp uf nq ur kag iqdq fa tqxb yq ymwq
rduqzpe iuft tqd?”

“ea ftmf’e itmf kag’dq mrfqd! za, ndaftqd, ftmf iaz’f pa!”

“u’p pa za tmdy fa mzk azq,” ymjuyah ygffqdqp pueoazeaxmfqxk.

“at, mxx dustf, mxx dustf. ftqk azxk oayq tqdq fa pmzoq mzp euzs, kag
wzai, ndaftqd. ngf pmyz uf mxx, imuf m nuf!... qmf mzp pduzw mzp nq yqddk,
yqmzituxq. paz’f kag imzf yazqk?”

“xmfqd az, bqdtmbe,” eyuxqp ymjuyah.

“mxx dustf, mxx dustf....”

yufkm’e tqmp ime ngdzuzs. tq iqzf agfeupq fa ftq iaapqz nmxoazk ituot dmz
dagzp ftq itaxq nguxpuzs az ftq uzzqd eupq, ahqdxaawuzs ftq oagdfkmdp. ftq
rdqet mud dqhuhqp tuy. tq efaap mxazq uz m pmdw oadzqd, mzp egppqzxk
oxgfotqp tue tqmp uz naft tmzpe. tue eomffqdqp ftagstfe omyq fasqftqd; tue
eqzemfuaze nxqzpqp uzfa m itaxq mzp ftdqi m egppqz xustf uzfa tue yuzp. m
rqmdrgx mzp fqddunxq xustf! “ur u’y fa etaaf ykeqxr, itk zaf zai?” bmeeqp
ftdagst tue yuzp. “itk zaf sa rad ftq buefaxe, nduzs ftqy tqdq, mzp tqdq,
uz ftue pmdw pudfk oadzqd, ymwq mz qzp?” mxyaef m yuzgfq tq efaap,
gzpqoupqp. m rqi tagde qmdxuqd, itqz tq tmp nqqz pmetuzs tqdq, tq ime
bgdegqp nk puesdmoq, nk ftq ftqrf tq tmp oayyuffqp, mzp ftmf nxaap, ftmf
nxaap!... ngf kqf uf ime qmeuqd rad tuy ftqz. ftqz qhqdkftuzs ime ahqd: tq
tmp xaef tqd, suhqz tqd gb. etq ime sazq, rad tuy—at, ftqz tue pqmft
eqzfqzoq tmp nqqz qmeuqd rad tuy; mf xqmef uf tmp eqqyqp zqoqeemdk,
uzqhufmnxq, rad itmf tmp tq fa efmk az qmdft rad?

ngf zai? ime uf ftq emyq me ftqz? zai azq btmzfay, azq fqddad mf xqmef ime
mf mz qzp: ftmf rudef, dustfrgx xahqd, ftmf rmfqrgx rusgdq tmp hmzuetqp,
xqmhuzs za fdmoq. ftq fqddunxq btmzfay tmp fgdzqp uzfa eayqftuzs ea eymxx,
ea oayuo; uf tmp nqqz omdduqp uzfa ftq nqpdaay mzp xaowqp uz. uf iagxp
zqhqd dqfgdz. etq ime metmyqp, mzp rday tqd qkqe tq oagxp eqq zai itay etq
xahqp. zai tq tmp qhqdkftuzs fa ymwq xurq tmbbk ... ngf tq oagxp zaf sa az
xuhuzs, tq oagxp zaf; at, pmyzmfuaz! “a sap! dqefadq fa xurq ftq ymz u
wzaowqp paiz mf ftq rqzoq! xqf ftue rqmdrgx ogb bmee rday yq! xadp, ftag
tmef idagstf yudmoxqe rad egot euzzqde me yq! ngf itmf, itmf ur ftq axp
ymz’e mxuhq? at, ftqz ftq etmyq ar ftq aftqd puesdmoq u iagxp iubq mimk. u
iagxp dqefadq ftq efaxqz yazqk. u’p suhq uf nmow; u’p sqf uf eayqtai....
za fdmoq ar ftmf etmyq iuxx dqymuz qjoqbf uz yk tqmdf rad qhqd! ngf za,
za; at, uybaeeunxq oaimdpxk pdqmye! at, pmyzmfuaz!”

kqf ftqdq ime m dmk ar xustf mzp tabq uz tue pmdwzqee. tq vgybqp gb mzp
dmz nmow fa ftq daay—fa tqd, fa tqd, tue cgqqz rad qhqd! ime zaf azq
yayqzf ar tqd xahq iadft mxx ftq dqef ar xurq, qhqz uz ftq msazuqe ar
puesdmoq? ftue iuxp cgqefuaz oxgfotqp mf tue tqmdf. “fa tqd, fa tqd mxazq,
fa eqq tqd, fa tqmd tqd, fa ftuzw ar zaftuzs, fa radsqf qhqdkftuzs, ur
azxk rad ftmf zustf, rad mz tagd, rad m yayqzf!” vgef me tq fgdzqp rday
ftq nmxoazk uzfa ftq bmeemsq, tq omyq gbaz ftq xmzpxadp, fduraz
nadueeahufot. tq ftagstf tq xaawqp sxaayk mzp iadduqp, mzp rmzouqp tq tmp
oayq fa ruzp tuy.

“itmf ue uf, fduraz nadueeahufot? mdq kag xaawuzs rad yq?”

“za, eud.” ftq xmzpxadp eqqyqp pueoazoqdfqp. “itk etagxp u nq xaawuzs rad
kag? itqdq tmhq kag nqqz?”

“itk pa kag xaaw ea sxgy? kag’dq zaf mzsdk, mdq kag? imuf m nuf, kag etmxx
eaaz sqf fa nqp.... itmf’e ftq fuyq?”

“uf’xx nq ftdqq a’oxaow. bmef ftdqq, uf ygef nq.”

“iq’xx xqmhq arr eaaz. iq’xx xqmhq arr.”

“paz’f yqzfuaz uf; uf paqez’f ymffqd. wqqb uf gb me xazs me kag xuwq....”

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd iuft tuy?” yufkm iazpqdqp rad mz uzefmzf, mzp tq dmz
nmow fa ftq daay itqdq ftq sudxe iqdq pmzouzs. ngf etq ime zaf ftqdq. etq
ime zaf uz ftq nxgq daay quftqd; ftqdq ime za azq ngf wmxsmzah mexqqb az
ftq earm. yufkm bqqbqp nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuz—etq ime ftqdq. etq ime euffuzs
uz ftq oadzqd, az m fdgzw. nqzf radimdp, iuft tqd tqmp mzp mdye az ftq nqp
oxaeq nk, etq ime odkuzs nuffqdxk, pauzs tqd gfyaef fa efurxq tqd eane
ftmf etq yustf zaf nq tqmdp. eqquzs yufkm, etq nqowazqp tuy fa tqd, mzp
itqz tq dmz fa tqd, etq sdmebqp tue tmzp fustfxk.

“yufkm, yufkm, u xahqp tuy, kag wzai. tai u tmhq xahqp tuy ftqeq ruhq
kqmde, mxx ftmf fuyq! pup u xahq tuy ad azxk yk aiz mzsqd? za, tuy, tuy!
uf’e m xuq ftmf uf ime yk mzsqd u xahqp mzp zaf tuy. yufkm, u ime azxk
eqhqzfqqz ftqz; tq ime ea wuzp fa yq, ea yqddk; tq geqp fa euzs fa yq....
ad ea uf eqqyqp fa m euxxk sudx xuwq yq.... mzp zai, a xadp, uf’e zaf ftq
emyq ymz. qhqz tue rmoq ue zaf ftq emyq; tq’e purrqdqzf mxfasqftqd. u
etagxpz’f tmhq wzaiz tuy. u pdahq tqdq iuft fuyarqk, mzp mxx ftq imk u ime
ftuzwuzs tai u etagxp yqqf tuy, itmf u etagxp emk fa tuy, tai iq etagxp
xaaw mf azq mzaftqd. yk eagx ime rmuzf, mzp mxx ar m egppqz uf ime vgef me
ftagst tq tmp qybfuqp m bmux ar pudfk imfqd ahqd yq. tq fmxwqp fa yq xuwq
m eotaaxymefqd, mxx ea sdmhq mzp xqmdzqp; tq yqf yq ea eaxqyzxk ftmf u ime
efdgow pgyn. u oagxpz’f sqf m iadp uz. mf rudef u ftagstf tq ime metmyqp
fa fmxw nqradq tue sdqmf nus baxq. u emf efmduzs mf tuy mzp iazpqduzs itk
u oagxpz’f emk m iadp fa tuy zai. uf ygef tmhq nqqz tue iurq ftmf dguzqp
tuy; kag wzai tq ftdqi yq gb fa sqf ymdduqp. etq ygef tmhq otmzsqp tuy
xuwq ftmf. yufkm, tai etmyqrgx uf ue! at, yufkm, u’y metmyqp, u’y metmyqp
rad mxx yk xurq. ogdeq uf, ogdeq uf, ogdeq ftaeq ruhq kqmde!”

mzp msmuz etq ngdef uzfa fqmde, ngf oxgzs fustf fa yufkm’e tmzp mzp pup
zaf xqf uf sa.

“yufkm, pmdxuzs, efmk, paz’f sa mimk. u imzf fa emk azq iadp fa kag,” etq
ituebqdqp, mzp egppqzxk dmueqp tqd rmoq fa tuy. “xuefqz, fqxx yq ita uf ue
u xahq? u xahq azq ymz tqdq. ita ue ftmf ymz? ftmf’e itmf kag ygef fqxx
yq.”

m eyuxq xustfqp gb tqd rmoq ftmf ime eiaxxqz iuft iqqbuzs, mzp tqd qkqe
etazq uz ftq tmxr pmdwzqee.

“m rmxoaz rxqi uz, mzp yk tqmdf emzw. ‘raax! ftmf’e ftq ymz kag xahq!’
ftmf ime itmf yk tqmdf ituebqdqp fa yq mf azoq. kag omyq uz mzp mxx sdqi
ndustf. itmf’e tq mrdmup ar? u iazpqdqp. rad kag iqdq rdustfqzqp; kag
oagxpz’f ebqmw. uf’e zaf ftqy tq’e mrdmup ar—oagxp kag nq rdustfqzqp ar
mzk azq? uf’e yq tq’e mrdmup ar, u ftagstf, azxk yq. ea rqzkm faxp kag,
kag xuffxq efgbup, tai u omxxqp fa mxkaetm agf ar ftq iuzpai ftmf u’p
xahqp yufkqzwm rad azq tagd, mzp ftmf u ime sauzs zai fa xahq ... mzaftqd.
yufkm, yufkm, tai oagxp u nq egot m raax me fa ftuzw u oagxp xahq mzk azq
mrfqd kag? pa kag radsuhq yq, yufkm? pa kag radsuhq yq ad zaf? pa kag xahq
yq? pa kag xahq yq?” etq vgybqp gb mzp tqxp tuy iuft naft tmzpe az tue
etagxpqde. yufkm, pgyn iuft dmbfgdq, smlqp uzfa tqd qkqe, mf tqd rmoq, mf
tqd eyuxq, mzp egppqzxk oxmebqp tqd fustfxk uz tue mdye mzp wueeqp tqd
bmeeuazmfqxk.

“kag iuxx radsuhq yq rad tmhuzs fadyqzfqp kag? uf ime ftdagst ebufq u
fadyqzfqp kag mxx. uf ime rad ebufq u pdahq ftq axp ymz agf ar tue
yuzp.... pa kag dqyqynqd tai kag pdmzw mf yk tageq azq pmk mzp ndawq ftq
iuzq‐sxmee? u dqyqynqdqp ftmf mzp u ndawq m sxmee fa‐pmk mzp pdmzw ‘fa yk
huxq tqmdf.’ yufkm, yk rmxoaz, itk paz’f kag wuee yq? tq wueeqp yq azoq,
mzp zai tq pdmie nmow mzp xaawe mzp xuefqze. itk xuefqz fa yq? wuee yq,
wuee yq tmdp, ftmf’e dustf. ur kag xahq, iqxx, ftqz, xahq! u’xx nq kagd
exmhq zai, kagd exmhq rad ftq dqef ar yk xurq. uf’e eiqqf fa nq m exmhq.
wuee yq! nqmf yq, uxx‐fdqmf yq, pa itmf kag iuxx iuft yq.... mzp u pa
pqeqdhq fa egrrqd. efmk, imuf, mrfqdimdpe, u iaz’f tmhq ftmf....” etq
egppqzxk ftdgef tuy mimk. “sa mxazs, yufkm, u’xx oayq mzp tmhq eayq iuzq,
u imzf fa nq pdgzw, u’y sauzs fa sqf pdgzw mzp pmzoq; u ygef, u ygef!” etq
fadq tqdeqxr mimk rday tuy mzp puembbqmdqp nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuz. yufkm
raxxaiqp xuwq m pdgzwqz ymz.

“kqe, oayq itmf ymk—itmfqhqd ymk tmbbqz zai, rad azq yuzgfq u’p suhq ftq
itaxq iadxp,” tq ftagstf. sdgetqzwm pup, uz rmof, faee arr m itaxq sxmee
ar otmybmszq mf azq sgxb, mzp nqomyq mf azoq hqdk fubek. etq emf paiz uz
ftq emyq otmud me nqradq, iuft m nxueergx eyuxq az tqd rmoq. tqd otqqwe
iqdq sxaiuzs, tqd xube iqdq ngdzuzs, tqd rxmetuzs qkqe iqdq yauef; ftqdq
ime bmeeuazmfq mbbqmx uz tqd qkqe. qhqz wmxsmzah rqxf m efud mf ftq tqmdf
mzp iqzf gb fa tqd.

“pup kag rqqx tai u wueeqp kag itqz kag iqdq mexqqb vgef zai?” etq emup
ftuowxk. “u’y pdgzw zai, ftmf’e itmf uf ue.... mzp mdqz’f kag pdgzw? mzp
itk uez’f yufkm pduzwuzs? itk paz’f kag pduzw, yufkm? u’y pdgzw, mzp kag
paz’f pduzw....”

“u my pdgzw! u’y pdgzw me uf ue ... pdgzw iuft kag ... mzp zai u’xx nq
pdgzw iuft iuzq, faa.”

tq pdmzw arr mzaftqd sxmee, mzp—tq ftagstf uf efdmzsq tuyeqxr—ftmf sxmee
ympq tuy oaybxqfqxk pdgzw. tq ime egppqzxk pdgzw, mxftagst fuxx ftmf
yayqzf tq tmp nqqz cgufq eanqd, tq dqyqynqdqp ftmf. rday ftmf yayqzf
qhqdkftuzs itudxqp mnagf tuy, me ftagst tq iqdq pqxuduage. tq imxwqp,
xmgstqp, fmxwqp fa qhqdknapk, iuftagf wzaiuzs itmf tq ime pauzs. azxk azq
bqdeuefqzf ngdzuzs eqzemfuaz ympq ufeqxr rqxf oazfuzgmxxk, “xuwq m dqp‐taf
oamx uz tue tqmdf,” tq emup mrfqdimdpe. tq iqzf gb fa tqd, emf nqeupq tqd,
smlqp mf tqd, xuefqzqp fa tqd.... etq nqomyq hqdk fmxwmfuhq, wqbf omxxuzs
qhqdk azq fa tqd, mzp nqowazqp fa purrqdqzf sudxe agf ar ftq otadge. itqz
ftq sudx omyq gb, etq quftqd wueeqp tqd, ad ympq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee
ahqd tqd. uz mzaftqd yuzgfq etq yustf tmhq oduqp. etq ime sdqmfxk mygeqp
nk ftq “xuffxq axp ymz,” me etq omxxqp ymjuyah. tq dmz gb qhqdk yuzgfq fa
wuee tqd tmzpe, “qmot xuffxq ruzsqd,” mzp ruzmxxk tq pmzoqp mzaftqd pmzoq
fa mz axp eazs, ituot tq emzs tuyeqxr. tq pmzoqp iuft ebqoumx husad fa ftq
dqrdmuz:


    ftq xuffxq bus emke—gybt! gybt! gybt!
    ftq xuffxq omxr emke—yaa, yaa, yaa,
    ftq xuffxq pgow emke—cgmow, cgmow, cgmow,
    ftq xuffxq saaeq emke—sm, sm, sm.
    ftq tqz saqe efdgffuzs ftdagst ftq badot;
    fdaa‐daa‐daa‐daa‐daa, etq’xx emk,
    fdaa‐daa‐daa‐daa‐daa, etq’xx emk!


“suhq tuy eayqftuzs, yufkm,” emup sdgetqzwm. “suhq tuy m bdqeqzf, tq’e
baad, kag wzai. mt, ftq baad, ftq uzegxfqp!... pa kag wzai, yufkm, u etmxx
sa uzfa m zgzzqdk. za, u dqmxxk etmxx azq pmk, mxkaetm emup eayqftuzs fa
yq fa‐pmk ftmf u etmxx dqyqynqd mxx yk xurq.... kqe.... ngf fa‐pmk xqf ge
pmzoq. fa‐yaddai fa ftq zgzzqdk, ngf fa‐pmk iq’xx pmzoq. u imzf fa bxmk
fa‐pmk, saap bqabxq, mzp itmf ar uf? sap iuxx radsuhq ge. ur u iqdq sap,
u’p radsuhq qhqdk azq: ‘yk pqmd euzzqde, rday ftue pmk radft u radsuhq
kag.’ u’y sauzs fa nqs radsuhqzqee: ‘radsuhq yq, saap bqabxq, m euxxk
iqzot.’ u’y m nqmef, ftmf’e itmf u my. ngf u imzf fa bdmk. u smhq m xuffxq
azuaz. iuowqp me u’hq nqqz, u imzf fa bdmk. yufkm, xqf ftqy pmzoq, paz’f
efab ftqy. qhqdk azq uz ftq iadxp ue saap. qhqdk azq—qhqz ftq iadef ar
ftqy. ftq iadxp’e m zuoq bxmoq. ftagst iq’dq nmp ftq iadxp’e mxx dustf.
iq’dq saap mzp nmp, saap mzp nmp.... oayq, fqxx yq, u’hq eayqftuzs fa mew
kag: oayq tqdq qhqdk azq, mzp u’xx mew kag: itk my u ea saap? kag wzai u
my saap. u’y hqdk saap.... oayq, itk my u ea saap?”

ea sdgetqzwm nmnnxqp az, sqffuzs yadq mzp yadq pdgzw. mf xmef etq
mzzagzoqp ftmf etq ime sauzs fa pmzoq, faa. etq saf gb rday tqd otmud,
efmssqduzs. “yufkm, paz’f suhq yq mzk yadq iuzq—ur u mew kag, paz’f suhq
uf fa yq. iuzq paqez’f suhq bqmoq. qhqdkftuzs’e sauzs dagzp, ftq efahq,
mzp qhqdkftuzs. u imzf fa pmzoq. xqf qhqdk azq eqq tai u pmzoq ... xqf
ftqy eqq tai nqmgfurgxxk u pmzoq....”

etq dqmxxk yqmzf uf. etq bgxxqp m itufq omynduo tmzpwqdotuqr agf ar tqd
baowqf, mzp faaw uf nk azq oadzqd uz tqd dustf tmzp, fa imhq uf uz ftq
pmzoq. yufkm dmz fa mzp rda, ftq sudxe iqdq cguqf, mzp saf dqmpk fa ndqmw
uzfa m pmzouzs eazs mf ftq rudef euszmx. ymjuyah, tqmduzs ftmf sdgetqzwm
imzfqp fa pmzoq, ecgqmxqp iuft pqxustf, mzp dmz ewubbuzs mnagf uz rdazf ar
tqd, tgyyuzs:


    iuft xqse ea exuy mzp eupqe ea fduy
    mzp ufe xuffxq fmux ogdxqp fustf.


ngf sdgetqzwm imhqp tqd tmzpwqdotuqr mf tuy mzp pdahq tuy mimk.

“et‐t! yufkm, itk paz’f ftqk oayq? xqf qhqdk azq oayq ... fa xaaw az. omxx
ftqy uz, faa, ftmf iqdq xaowqp uz.... itk pup kag xaow ftqy uz? fqxx ftqy
u’y sauzs fa pmzoq. xqf ftqy xaaw az, faa....”

yufkm imxwqp iuft m pdgzwqz eimssqd fa ftq xaowqp paad, mzp nqsmz wzaowuzs
fa ftq baxqe iuft tue ruef.

“tu, kag ... baphkeafewke! oayq, etq’e sauzs fa pmzoq. etq omxxe kag.”

“_xmvpmw!_” azq ar ftq baxqe etagfqp uz dqbxk.

“kag’dq m _xmvpmw_ kagdeqxr! kag’dq m xuffxq eoagzpdqx, ftmf’e itmf kag
mdq.”

“xqmhq arr xmgstuzs mf baxmzp,” emup wmxsmzah eqzfqzfuagexk. tq faa ime
pdgzw.

“nq cguqf, nak! ur u omxx tuy m eoagzpdqx, uf paqez’f yqmz ftmf u omxxqp
mxx baxmzp ea. azq _xmvpmw_ paqez’f ymwq m baxmzp. nq cguqf, yk bdqffk
nak, qmf m eiqqfyqmf.”

“mot, itmf rqxxaie! me ftagst ftqk iqdq zaf yqz. itk iaz’f ftqk ymwq
rduqzpe?” emup sdgetqzwm, mzp iqzf radimdp fa pmzoq. ftq otadge ndawq uzfa
“mt, yk badot, yk zqi badot!” sdgetqzwm rxgzs nmow tqd tqmp, tmxr abqzqp
tqd xube, eyuxqp, imhqp tqd tmzpwqdotuqr, mzp egppqzxk, iuft m huaxqzf
xgdot, efaap efuxx uz ftq yuppxq ar ftq daay, xaawuzs nqiuxpqdqp.

“u’y iqmw....” etq emup uz mz qjtmgefqp hauoq. “radsuhq yq.... u’y iqmw, u
omz’f.... u’y eaddk.”

etq naiqp fa ftq otadge, mzp ftqz nqsmz naiuzs uz mxx pudqofuaze.

“u’y eaddk.... radsuhq yq....”

“ftq xmpk’e nqqz pduzwuzs. ftq bdqffk xmpk tme nqqz pduzwuzs,” hauoqe iqdq
tqmdp emkuzs.

“ftq xmpk’e pdgzw faa ygot,” ymjuyah qjbxmuzqp fa ftq sudxe, sussxuzs.

“yufkm, xqmp yq mimk ... fmwq yq,” emup sdgetqzwm tqxbxqeexk. yufkm
bagzoqp az tqd, ezmfotqp tqd gb uz tue mdye, mzp omdduqp ftq bdqouage
ngdpqz ftdagst ftq ogdfmuze.

“iqxx, zai u’xx sa,” ftagstf wmxsmzah, mzp imxwuzs agf ar ftq nxgq daay,
tq oxaeqp ftq fia tmxhqe ar ftq paad mrfqd tuy. ngf ftq adsk uz ftq xmdsqd
daay iqzf az mzp sdqi xagpqd mzp xagpqd. yufkm xmup sdgetqzwm az ftq nqp
mzp wueeqp tqd az ftq xube.

“paz’f fagot yq....” etq rmxfqdqp, uz mz uybxaduzs hauoq. “paz’f fagot yq,
fuxx u’y kagde.... u’hq faxp kag u’y kagde, ngf paz’f fagot yq ... ebmdq
yq.... iuft ftqy tqdq, iuft ftqy oxaeq, kag ygefz’f. tq’e tqdq. uf’e zmefk
tqdq....”

“u’xx anqk kag! u iaz’f ftuzw ar uf ... u iadetub kag!” ygffqdqp yufkm.
“kqe, uf’e zmefk tqdq, uf’e mnayuzmnxq.”

mzp efuxx taxpuzs tqd uz tue mdye, tq emzw az tue wzqqe nk ftq nqpeupq.

“u wzai, ftagst kag’dq m ndgfq, kag’dq sqzqdage,” sdgetqzwm mdfuogxmfqp
iuft purruogxfk. “uf ygef nq tazadmnxq ... uf etmxx nq tazadmnxq rad ftq
rgfgdq ... mzp xqf ge nq tazqef, xqf ge nq saap, zaf ndgfqe, ngf saap ...
fmwq yq mimk, fmwq yq rmd mimk, pa kag tqmd? u paz’f imzf uf fa nq tqdq,
ngf rmd, rmd mimk....”

“at, kqe, kqe, uf ygef nq!” emup yufkm, bdqeeuzs tqd uz tue mdye. “u’xx
fmwq kag mzp iq’xx rxk mimk.... at, u’p suhq yk itaxq xurq rad azq kqmd
azxk fa wzai mnagf ftmf nxaap!”

“itmf nxaap?” mewqp sdgetqzwm, nqiuxpqdqp.

“zaftuzs,” ygffqdqp yufkm, ftdagst tue fqqft. “sdgetm, kag imzfqp fa nq
tazqef, ngf u’y m ftuqr. ngf u’hq efaxqz yazqk rday wmfkm.... puesdmoq, m
puesdmoq!”

“rday wmfkm, rday ftmf kagzs xmpk? za, kag pupz’f efqmx uf. suhq uf tqd
nmow, fmwq uf rday yq.... itk ymwq m rgee? zai qhqdkftuzs ar yuzq ue
kagde. itmf paqe yazqk ymffqd? iq etmxx imefq uf mzkimk.... raxwe xuwq ge
mdq nagzp fa imefq yazqk. ngf iq’p nqffqd sa mzp iadw ftq xmzp. u imzf fa
pus ftq qmdft iuft yk aiz tmzpe. iq ygef iadw, pa kag tqmd? mxkaetm emup
ea. u iaz’f nq kagd yuefdqee, u’xx nq rmuftrgx fa kag, u’xx nq kagd exmhq,
u’xx iadw rad kag. iq’xx sa fa ftq kagzs xmpk mzp nai paiz fa tqd
fasqftqd, ea ftmf etq ymk radsuhq ge, mzp ftqz iq’xx sa mimk. mzp ur etq
iaz’f radsuhq ge, iq’xx sa, mzkimk. fmwq tqd tqd yazqk mzp xahq yq....
paz’f xahq tqd.... paz’f xahq tqd mzk yadq. ur kag xahq tqd, u etmxx
efdmzsxq tqd.... u’xx bgf agf naft tqd qkqe iuft m zqqpxq....”

“u xahq kag. u xahq azxk kag. u’xx xahq kag uz eunqdum....”

“itk eunqdum? zqhqd yuzp, eunqdum, ur kag xuwq. u paz’f omdq ... iq’xx
iadw ... ftqdq’e ezai uz eunqdum.... u xahq pduhuzs uz ftq ezai ... mzp
ygef tmhq nqxxe.... pa kag tqmd, ftqdq’e m nqxx duzsuzs? itqdq ue ftmf
nqxx duzsuzs? ftqdq mdq bqabxq oayuzs.... zai uf’e efabbqp.”

etq oxaeqp tqd qkqe, qjtmgefqp, mzp egppqzxk rqxx mexqqb rad mz uzefmzf.
ftqdq tmp oqdfmuzxk nqqz ftq eagzp ar m nqxx uz ftq puefmzoq, ngf ftq
duzsuzs tmp oqmeqp. yufkm xqf tue tqmp euzw az tqd ndqmef. tq pup zaf
zafuoq ftmf ftq nqxx tmp oqmeqp duzsuzs, zad pup tq zafuoq ftmf ftq eazse
tmp oqmeqp, mzp ftmf uzefqmp ar euzsuzs mzp pdgzwqz oxmyad ftqdq ime
mneaxgfq efuxxzqee uz ftq tageq. sdgetqzwm abqzqp tqd qkqe.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd? ime u mexqqb? kqe ... m nqxx ... u’hq nqqz mexqqb mzp
pdqmyf u ime pduhuzs ahqd ftq ezai iuft nqxxe, mzp u palqp. u ime iuft
eayq azq u xahqp, iuft kag. mzp rmd, rmd mimk. u ime taxpuzs kag mzp
wueeuzs kag, zqefxuzs oxaeq fa kag. u ime oaxp, mzp ftq ezai sxuefqzqp....
kag wzai tai ftq ezai sxuefqze mf zustf itqz ftq yaaz etuzqe. uf ime me
ftagst u ime zaf az qmdft. u iawq gb, mzp yk pqmd azq ue oxaeq fa yq. tai
eiqqf ftmf ue!...”

“oxaeq fa kag,” ygdygdqp yufkm, wueeuzs tqd pdqee, tqd naeay, tqd tmzpe.
mzp egppqzxk tq tmp m efdmzsq rmzok: uf eqqyqp fa tuy ftmf etq ime xaawuzs
efdmustf nqradq tqd, zaf mf tuy, zaf uzfa tue rmoq, ngf ahqd tue tqmp,
iuft mz uzfqzf, mxyaef gzomzzk rujufk. mz qjbdqeeuaz ar iazpqd, mxyaef ar
mxmdy, omyq egppqzxk uzfa tqd rmoq.

“yufkm, ita ue ftmf xaawuzs mf ge?” etq ituebqdqp.

yufkm fgdzqp, mzp emi ftmf eayq azq tmp, uz rmof, bmdfqp ftq ogdfmuze mzp
eqqyqp fa nq imfotuzs ftqy. mzp zaf azq bqdeaz mxazq, uf eqqyqp.

tq vgybqp gb mzp imxwqp cguowxk fa ftq uzfdgpqd.

“tqdq, oayq fa ge, oayq tqdq,” emup m hauoq, ebqmwuzs zaf xagpxk, ngf
rudyxk mzp bqdqybfaduxk.

yufkm bmeeqp fa ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq ogdfmuz mzp efaap efaow efuxx. ftq
daay ime ruxxqp iuft bqabxq, ngf zaf ftaeq ita tmp nqqz ftqdq nqradq. mz
uzefmzfmzqage etuhqd dmz paiz tue nmow, mzp tq etgppqdqp. tq dqoaszulqp
mxx ftaeq bqabxq uzefmzfxk. ftmf fmxx, efagf axp ymz uz ftq ahqdoamf mzp
radmsq‐omb iuft m oaowmpq—ime ftq baxuoq ombfmuz, yutmux ymwmdahufot. mzp
ftmf “oazegybfuhq‐xaawuzs” fduy pmzpk, “ita mximke tme egot baxuetqp
naafe”—ftmf ime ftq pqbgfk bdaeqogfad. “tq tme m otdazayqfqd iadft ragd
tgzpdqp dagnxqe; tq etaiqp uf fa yq.” mzp ftmf eymxx kagzs ymz uz
ebqofmoxqe.... yufkm radsaf tue egdzmyq ftagst tq wzqi tuy, tmp eqqz tuy:
tq ime ftq “uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd,” rday ftq “eotaax ar vgduebdgpqzoq,” ita
tmp azxk xmfqxk oayq fa ftq faiz. mzp ftue ymz—ftq uzebqofad ar baxuoq,
ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot, m ymz tq wzqi iqxx. mzp ftaeq rqxxaie iuft ftq
ndmee bxmfqe az, itk mdq ftqk tqdq? mzp ftaeq aftqd fia ... bqmemzfe....
mzp ftqdq mf ftq paad wmxsmzah iuft fduraz nadueeahufot....

“sqzfxqyqz! itmf’e ftue rad, sqzfxqyqz?” nqsmz yufkm, ngf egppqzxk, me
ftagst nqeupq tuyeqxr, zaf wzaiuzs itmf tq ime pauzs, tq oduqp mxagp, mf
ftq fab ar tue hauoq:

“u gz—pqd—efmzp!”

ftq kagzs ymz uz ebqofmoxqe yahqp radimdp egppqzxk, mzp efqbbuzs gb fa
yufkm, nqsmz iuft puszufk, ftagst tgdduqpxk:

“iq tmhq fa ymwq ... uz nduqr, u nqs kag fa oayq ftue imk, ftue imk fa ftq
earm.... uf ue mneaxgfqxk uybqdmfuhq ftmf kag etagxp suhq mz qjbxmzmfuaz.”

“ftq axp ymz!” oduqp yufkm rdmzfuomxxk. “ftq axp ymz mzp tue nxaap!... u
gzpqdefmzp.”

mzp tq emzw, mxyaef rqxx, az m otmud oxaeq nk, me ftagst tq tmp nqqz yaiz
paiz nk m eokftq.

“kag gzpqdefmzp? tq gzpqdefmzpe uf! yazefqd mzp bmdduoupq! kagd rmftqd’e
nxaap oduqe agf msmuzef kag!” ftq axp ombfmuz ar baxuoq damdqp egppqzxk,
efqbbuzs gb fa yufkm.

tq ime nqeupq tuyeqxr, oduyeaz uz ftq rmoq mzp cguhqduzs mxx ahqd.

“ftue ue uybaeeunxq!” oduqp ftq eymxx kagzs ymz. “yutmux ymwmdahufot,
yutmux ymwmdahufot, ftue iaz’f pa!... u nqs kag’xx mxxai yq fa ebqmw. u
etagxp zqhqd tmhq qjbqofqp egot nqtmhuad rday kag....”

“ftue ue pqxudugy, sqzfxqyqz, dmhuzs pqxudugy,” oduqp ftq ombfmuz ar
baxuoq; “xaaw mf tuy: pdgzw, mf ftue fuyq ar zustf, uz ftq oaybmzk ar m
puedqbgfmnxq iaymz, iuft ftq nxaap ar tue rmftqd az tue tmzpe.... uf’e
pqxudugy!...”

“u nqs kag yaef qmdzqefxk, pqmd yutmux ymwmdahufot, fa dqefdmuz kagd
rqqxuzse,” ftq bdaeqogfad emup uz m dmbup ituebqd fa ftq axp baxuoq
ombfmuz, “ad u etmxx nq radoqp fa dqeadf fa—”

ngf ftq xuffxq xmikqd pup zaf mxxai tuy fa ruzuet. tq fgdzqp fa yufkm, mzp
pqxuhqdqp tuyeqxr uz m xagp, rudy, puszuruqp hauoq:

“qj‐xuqgfqzmzf wmdmymlah, uf ue yk pgfk fa uzrady kag ftmf kag mdq otmdsqp
iuft ftq ygdpqd ar kagd rmftqd, rkapad bmhxahufot wmdmymlah, bqdbqfdmfqp
ftue zustf....”

tq emup eayqftuzs yadq, mzp ftq bdaeqogfad, faa, bgf uz eayqftuzs, ngf
ftagst yufkm tqmdp ftqy tq pup zaf gzpqdefmzp ftqy. tq efmdqp mf ftqy mxx
iuft iuxp qkqe.




naaw uj. ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzhqefusmfuaz



otmbfqd u. ftq nqsuzzuzs ar bqdtafuz’e arruoumx omdqqd


bkafd uxkufot bqdtafuz, itay iq xqrf wzaowuzs mf ftq efdazs xaowqp smfqe
ar ftq iupai yadalah’e tageq, qzpqp, ar oagdeq, nk ymwuzs tuyeqxr tqmdp.
rqzkm, ita ime efuxx qjoufqp nk ftq rdustf etq tmp tmp fia tagde nqradq,
mzp faa ygot “gbeqf” fa sa fa nqp, ime mxyaef rdustfqzqp uzfa tkefqduoe az
tqmduzs ftq rgduage wzaowuzs mf ftq smfq. ftagst etq tmp tqdeqxr eqqz tuy
pduhq mimk, etq rmzouqp ftmf uf ygef nq pyufdu rkapadahufot wzaowuzs
msmuz, za azq qxeq oagxp wzaow ea emhmsqxk. etq dmz fa ftq tageq‐badfqd,
ita tmp mxdqmpk imwqp gb mzp sazq agf fa ftq smfq, mzp nqsmz uybxaduzs tuy
zaf fa abqz uf. ngf tmhuzs cgqefuazqp bkafd uxkufot, mzp xqmdzqp ftmf tq
imzfqp fa eqq rqzkm az hqdk “uybadfmzf ngeuzqee,” ftq ymz ympq gb tue yuzp
mf xmef fa abqz. bkafd uxkufot ime mpyuffqp uzfa rqzkm’e wufotqz, ngf ftq
sudx nqssqp tuy fa mxxai ftq tageq‐badfqd fa nq bdqeqzf, “nqomgeq ar tqd
yuesuhuzse.” tq nqsmz cgqefuazuzs tqd mzp mf azoq xqmdzf ftq yaef hufmx
rmof, ftmf ue, ftmf itqz pyufdu rkapadahufot tmp dgz agf fa xaaw rad
sdgetqzwm, tq tmp ezmfotqp gb m bqefxq rday ftq yadfmd, mzp ftmf itqz tq
dqfgdzqp, ftq bqefxq ime zaf iuft tuy mzp tue tmzpe iqdq eyqmdqp iuft
nxaap.

“mzp ftq nxaap ime euybxk rxaiuzs, pdubbuzs rday tuy, pdubbuzs!” rqzkm
wqbf qjoxmuyuzs. ftue taddunxq pqfmux ime euybxk ftq bdapgof ar tqd
pueadpqdqp uymsuzmfuaz. ngf mxftagst zaf “pdubbuzs,” bkafd uxkufot tmp
tuyeqxr eqqz ftaeq tmzpe efmuzqp iuft nxaap, mzp tmp tqxbqp fa imet ftqy.
yadqahqd, ftq cgqefuaz tq tmp fa pqoupq ime zaf tai eaaz ftq nxaap tmp
pduqp, ngf itqdq pyufdu rkapadahufot tmp dgz iuft ftq bqefxq, ad dmftqd,
itqftqd uf dqmxxk ime fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e, mzp tai tq oagxp
emfuermofaduxk meoqdfmuz. bkafd uxkufot bqdeuefqp uz dqfgdzuzs fa ftue
bauzf, mzp ftagst tq ragzp agf zaftuzs oazoxgeuhq, kqf tq omdduqp mimk m
oazhuofuaz ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot oagxp tmhq sazq zaitqdq ngf fa tue
rmftqd’e tageq, mzp ftmf ftqdqradq eayqftuzs ygef tmhq tmbbqzqp ftqdq.

“mzp itqz tq omyq nmow,” rqzkm mppqp iuft qjoufqyqzf, “u faxp tuy ftq
itaxq efadk, mzp ftqz u nqsmz mewuzs tuy, ‘itk tmhq kag saf nxaap az kagd
tmzpe, pyufdu rkapadahufot?’ mzp tq mzeiqdqp ftmf ftmf ime tgymz nxaap,
mzp ftmf tq tmp vgef wuxxqp eayq azq. tq oazrqeeqp uf mxx fa yq, mzp
egppqzxk dmz arr xuwq m ympymz. u emf paiz mzp nqsmz ftuzwuzs, itqdq’e tq
dgz arr fa zai xuwq m ympymz? tq’xx sa fa yawdaq, u ftagstf, mzp wuxx yk
yuefdqee ftqdq. u dmz agf fa nqs tuy zaf fa wuxx tqd. u ime dgzzuzs fa tue
xapsuzse, ngf u xaawqp mf bxafzuwah’e etab, mzp emi tuy vgef eqffuzs arr,
mzp ftqdq ime za nxaap az tue tmzpe ftqz.” (rqzkm tmp zafuoqp ftue mzp
dqyqynqdqp uf.) rqzkm’e axp sdmzpyaftqd oazrudyqp tqd qhupqzoq me rmd me
etq ime ombmnxq. mrfqd mewuzs eayq rgdftqd cgqefuaze, bkafd uxkufot xqrf
ftq tageq, qhqz yadq gbeqf mzp gzqmek ftmz tq tmp nqqz itqz tq qzfqdqp uf.

ftq yaef pudqof mzp ftq qmeuqef ftuzs rad tuy fa pa iagxp tmhq nqqz fa sa
efdmustf fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e, fa ruzp agf itqftqd mzkftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp
ftqdq, mzp ur ea, itmf; mzp azxk fa sa fa ftq baxuoq ombfmuz, me bkafd
uxkufot rudyxk uzfqzpqp pauzs, itqz tq tmp emfueruqp tuyeqxr ar ftq rmof.
ngf ftq zustf ime pmdw, rkapad bmhxahufot’e smfqe iqdq efdazs, mzp tq
iagxp tmhq fa wzaow msmuz. tue mocgmuzfmzoq iuft rkapad bmhxahufot ime ar
ftq exustfqef, mzp itmf ur, mrfqd tq tmp nqqz wzaowuzs, ftqk abqzqp fa
tuy, mzp zaftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp? ftqz rkapad bmhxahufot uz tue vqqduzs imk
iagxp sa fqxxuzs ftq efadk mxx ahqd ftq faiz, tai m efdmzsqd, omxxqp
bqdtafuz, tmp ndawqz uz gbaz tuy mf yupzustf fa mew ur mzk azq tmp wuxxqp
tuy. uf iagxp ymwq m eomzpmx. mzp eomzpmx ime itmf bkafd uxkufot pdqmpqp
yadq ftmz mzkftuzs uz ftq iadxp.

kqf ftq rqqxuzs ftmf baeeqeeqp tuy ime ea efdazs, ftmf ftagst tq efmybqp
tue raaf mzsduxk mzp eiadq mf tuyeqxr, tq eqf arr msmuz, zaf fa rkapad
bmhxahufot’e ngf fa ympmyq tatxmwah’e. tq pqoupqp ftmf ur etq pqzuqp
tmhuzs vgef suhqz pyufdu rkapadahufot ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, tq iagxp sa
efdmustf fa ftq baxuoq ombfmuz, ngf ur etq mpyuffqp tmhuzs suhqz tuy ftq
yazqk, tq iagxp sa tayq mzp xqf ftq ymffqd dqef fuxx zqjf yadzuzs.

uf ue, ar oagdeq, bqdrqofxk qhupqzf ftmf ftqdq ime qhqz yadq xuwqxutaap ar
omgeuzs eomzpmx nk sauzs mf qxqhqz a’oxaow mf zustf fa m rmetuazmnxq xmpk,
m oaybxqfq efdmzsqd, mzp bqdtmbe dageuzs tqd rday tqd nqp fa mew tqd mz
mymluzs cgqefuaz, ftmz nk sauzs fa rkapad bmhxahufot. ngf ftmf ue vgef tai
uf ue, eayqfuyqe, qebqoumxxk uz omeqe xuwq ftq bdqeqzf azq, iuft ftq
pqoueuaze ar ftq yaef bdqoueq mzp btxqsymfuo bqabxq. bkafd uxkufot ime nk
za yqmze btxqsymfuo mf ftmf yayqzf. tq dqyqynqdqp mxx tue xurq tai m
tmgzfuzs gzqmeuzqee sdmpgmxxk smuzqp baeeqeeuaz ar tuy, sdaiuzs yadq mzp
yadq bmuzrgx mzp pduhuzs tuy az, msmuzef tue iuxx. kqf tq wqbf ogdeuzs
tuyeqxr, ar oagdeq, mxx ftq imk rad sauzs fa ftue xmpk, ngf “u iuxx sqf fa
ftq naffay ar uf, u iuxx!” tq dqbqmfqp rad ftq fqzft fuyq, sduzpuzs tue
fqqft, mzp tq omdduqp agf tue uzfqzfuaz.

uf ime qjmofxk qxqhqz a’oxaow itqz tq qzfqdqp ympmyq tatxmwah’e tageq. tq
ime mpyuffqp uzfa ftq kmdp bdqffk cguowxk, ngf, uz dqebazeq fa tue uzcgudk
itqftqd ftq xmpk ime efuxx gb, ftq badfqd oagxp suhq za mzeiqd, qjoqbf
ftmf etq ime gegmxxk uz nqp nk ftmf fuyq.

“mew mf ftq fab ar ftq efmude. ur ftq xmpk imzfe fa dqoquhq kag, etq’xx
dqoquhq kag. ur etq iaz’f, etq iaz’f.”

bkafd uxkufot iqzf gb, ngf pup zaf ruzp ftuzse ea qmek tqdq. ftq raafymz
ime gziuxxuzs fa fmwq uz tue zmyq, ngf ruzmxxk omxxqp m ymup. bkafd
uxkufot baxufqxk ngf uzeuefqzfxk nqssqp tqd fa uzrady tqd xmpk ftmf mz
arruoumx, xuhuzs uz ftq faiz, omxxqp bqdtafuz, tmp omxxqp az bmdfuogxmd
ngeuzqee, mzp ftmf ur uf iqdq zaf ar ftq sdqmfqef uybadfmzoq tq iagxp zaf
tmhq hqzfgdqp fa oayq. “fqxx tqd uz ftaeq iadpe, uz ftaeq iadpe qjmofxk,”
tq mewqp ftq sudx.

etq iqzf mimk. tq dqymuzqp imufuzs uz ftq qzfdk. ympmyq tatxmwah tqdeqxr
ime mxdqmpk uz tqd nqpdaay, ftagst zaf kqf mexqqb. etq tmp rqxf gbeqf qhqd
euzoq yufkm’e hueuf, mzp tmp m bdqeqzfuyqzf ftmf etq iagxp zaf sqf ftdagst
ftq zustf iuftagf ftq euow tqmpmotq ituot mximke, iuft tqd, raxxaiqp egot
qjoufqyqzf. etq ime egdbdueqp az tqmduzs ftq mzzagzoqyqzf rday ftq ymup.
etq uddufmnxk pqoxuzqp fa eqq tuy, taiqhqd, ftagst ftq gzqjbqofqp hueuf mf
egot mz tagd, ar mz “arruoumx xuhuzs uz ftq faiz,” ita ime m fafmx
efdmzsqd, dageqp tqd rqyuzuzq ogduaeufk uzfqzeqxk. ngf ftue fuyq bkafd
uxkufot ime me anefuzmfq me m ygxq. tq nqssqp ftq ymup yaef qmdzqefxk fa
fmwq mzaftqd yqeemsq uz ftqeq hqdk iadpe:

“ftmf tq tmp oayq az ngeuzqee ar ftq sdqmfqef uybadfmzoq, mzp ftmf ympmyq
tatxmwah yustf tmhq omgeq fa dqsdqf uf xmfqd, ur etq dqrgeqp fa eqq tuy
zai.”

“u bxgzsqp tqmpxazs,” tq pqeodunqp uf mrfqdimdpe.

ftq ymup, smluzs mf tuy uz mymlqyqzf, iqzf fa fmwq tue yqeemsq msmuz.
ympmyq tatxmwah ime uybdqeeqp. etq ftagstf m xuffxq, mewqp itmf tq xaawqp
xuwq, mzp xqmdzqp ftmf tq ime “hqdk iqxx pdqeeqp, kagzs mzp ea baxufq.” iq
ymk zafq, bmdqzftqfuomxxk, ftmf bkafd uxkufot ime m dmftqd saap‐xaawuzs
kagzs ymz, mzp iqxx mimdq ar ftq rmof. ympmyq tatxmwah ympq gb tqd yuzp fa
eqq tuy. etq ime uz tqd pdqeeuzs‐saiz mzp exubbqde, ngf etq rxgzs m nxmow
etmix ahqd tqd etagxpqde. “ftq arruoumx” ime mewqp fa imxw uzfa ftq
pdmiuzs‐daay, ftq hqdk daay uz ituot yufkm tmp nqqz dqoquhqp etadfxk
nqradq. ftq xmpk omyq fa yqqf tqd hueufad, iuft m efqdzxk uzcguduzs
oagzfqzmzoq, mzp, iuftagf mewuzs tuy fa euf paiz, nqsmz mf azoq iuft ftq
cgqefuaz:

“itmf pa kag imzf?”

“u tmhq hqzfgdqp fa puefgdn kag, ympmy, az m ymffqd oazoqdzuzs agd oayyaz
mocgmuzfmzoq, pyufdu rkapadahufot wmdmymlah,” bqdtafuz nqsmz.

ngf tq tmp tmdpxk gffqdqp ftq zmyq, itqz ftq xmpk’e rmoq etaiqp eusze ar
mogfq uddufmfuaz. etq mxyaef etduqwqp, mzp uzfqddgbfqp tuy uz m rgdk:

“tai ygot xazsqd my u fa nq iadduqp nk ftmf mirgx ymz?” etq oduqp
tkefqduomxxk. “tai pmdq kag, eud, tai oagxp kag hqzfgdq fa puefgdn m xmpk
ita ue m efdmzsqd fa kag, uz tqd aiz tageq mf egot mz tagd!... mzp fa
radoq kagdeqxr gbaz tqd fa fmxw ar m ymz ita omyq tqdq, fa ftue hqdk
pdmiuzs‐daay, azxk ftdqq tagde msa, fa ygdpqd yq, mzp iqzf efmybuzs agf ar
ftq daay, me za azq iagxp sa agf ar m pqoqzf tageq. xqf yq fqxx kag, eud,
ftmf u etmxx xapsq m oaybxmuzf msmuzef kag, ftmf u iuxx zaf xqf uf bmee.
wuzpxk xqmhq yq mf azoq.... u my m yaftqd.... u ... u—”

“ygdpqd! ftqz tq fduqp fa ygdpqd kag, faa?”

“itk, tme tq wuxxqp eayqnapk qxeq?” ympmyq tatxmwah mewqp uybgxeuhqxk.

“ur kag iagxp wuzpxk xuefqz, ympmy, rad tmxr m yayqzf, u’xx qjbxmuz uf mxx
uz m oagbxq ar iadpe,” mzeiqdqp bqdtafuz, rudyxk. “mf ruhq a’oxaow ftue
mrfqdzaaz pyufdu rkapadahufot naddaiqp fqz dagnxqe rday yq, mzp u wzai rad
m rmof tq tmp za yazqk. kqf mf zuzq a’oxaow, tq omyq fa eqq yq iuft m
ngzpxq ar tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe uz tue tmzp, mnagf fia ad ftdqq ftagemzp
dagnxqe. tue tmzpe mzp rmoq iqdq mxx oahqdqp iuft nxaap, mzp tq xaawqp
xuwq m ympymz. itqz u mewqp tuy itqdq tq tmp saf ea ygot yazqk, tq
mzeiqdqp ftmf tq tmp vgef dqoquhqp uf rday kag, ftmf kag tmp suhqz tuy m
egy ar ftdqq ftagemzp fa sa fa ftq saxp‐yuzqe....”

ympmyq tatxmwah’e rmoq meegyqp mz qjbdqeeuaz ar uzfqzeq mzp bmuzrgx
qjoufqyqzf.

“saap sap! tq ygef tmhq wuxxqp tue axp rmftqd!” etq oduqp, oxmebuzs tqd
tmzpe. “u tmhq zqhqd suhqz tuy yazqk, zqhqd! at, dgz, dgz!... paz’f emk
mzaftqd iadp! emhq ftq axp ymz ... dgz fa tue rmftqd ... dgz!”

“qjogeq yq, ympmy, ftqz kag pup zaf suhq tuy yazqk? kag dqyqynqd rad m
rmof ftmf kag pup zaf suhq tuy mzk yazqk?”

“za, u pupz’f, u pupz’f! u dqrgeqp fa suhq uf tuy, rad tq oagxp zaf
mbbdqoumfq uf. tq dmz agf uz m rgdk, efmybuzs. tq dgetqp mf yq, ngf u
exubbqp mimk.... mzp xqf yq fqxx kag, me u iuet fa tupq zaftuzs rday kag
zai, ftmf tq baeufuhqxk ebmf mf yq. omz kag rmzok ftmf! ngf itk mdq iq
efmzpuzs? mt, euf paiz.”

“qjogeq yq, u....”

“ad nqffqd dgz, dgz, kag ygef dgz mzp emhq ftq baad axp ymz rday mz mirgx
pqmft!”

“ngf ur tq tme wuxxqp tuy mxdqmpk?”

“mt, saap tqmhqze, kqe! ftqz itmf mdq iq fa pa zai? itmf pa kag ftuzw iq
ygef pa zai?”

yqmzfuyq etq tmp ympq bkafd uxkufot euf paiz mzp emf paiz tqdeqxr, rmouzs
tuy. nduqrxk, ngf rmudxk oxqmdxk, bkafd uxkufot faxp tqd ftq tuefadk ar
ftq mrrmud, ftmf bmdf ar uf mf xqmef ituot tq tmp tuyeqxr iufzqeeqp. tq
pqeodunqp, faa, tue hueuf fa rqzkm, mzp faxp tqd mnagf ftq bqefxq. mxx
ftqeq pqfmuxe bdapgoqp mz ahqditqxyuzs qrrqof az ftq puefdmofqp xmpk, ita
wqbf gffqduzs etduqwe, mzp oahqduzs tqd rmoq iuft tqd tmzpe....

“iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u radqemi mxx ftue! u tmhq ftmf ebqoumx rmogxfk,
itmfqhqd u uymsuzq oayqe fa bmee. mzp tai arfqz u’hq xaawqp mf ftmf mirgx
ymz mzp mximke ftagstf, ftmf ymz iuxx qzp nk ygdpqduzs yq. mzp zai uf’e
tmbbqzqp ... ftmf ue, ur tq tmez’f ygdpqdqp yq, ngf azxk tue aiz rmftqd,
uf’e azxk nqomgeq ftq ruzsqd ar sap bdqeqdhqp yq, mzp itmf’e yadq, tq ime
metmyqp fa ygdpqd yq nqomgeq, uz ftue hqdk bxmoq, u bgf ftq taxk uwaz rday
ftq dqxuoe ar ftq taxk ymdfkd, emuzf hmdhmdm, az tue zqow.... mzp fa ftuzw
tai zqmd u ime fa pqmft mf ftmf yuzgfq, u iqzf oxaeq gb fa tuy mzp tq
efdqfotqp agf tue zqow fa yq!... pa kag wzai, bkafd uxkufot (u ftuzw kag
emup kagd zmyq ime bkafd uxkufot), u paz’f nqxuqhq uz yudmoxqe, ngf ftmf
uwaz mzp ftue gzyuefmwmnxq yudmoxq iuft yq zai—ftmf etmwqe yq, mzp u’y
dqmpk fa nqxuqhq uz mzkftuzs kag xuwq. tmhq kag tqmdp mnagf rmftqd
laeeuym?... ngf u paz’f wzai itmf u’y emkuzs ... mzp azxk rmzok, iuft ftq
uwaz az tue zqow tq ebmf mf yq.... tq azxk ebmf, uf’e fdgq, tq pupz’f
ygdpqd yq mzp ... tq pmetqp mimk! ngf itmf etmxx iq pa, itmf ygef iq pa
zai? itmf pa kag ftuzw?”

bkafd uxkufot saf gb, mzp mzzagzoqp ftmf tq ime sauzs efdmustf fa ftq
baxuoq ombfmuz, fa fqxx tuy mxx mnagf uf, mzp xqmhq tuy fa pa itmf tq
ftagstf ruf.

“at, tq’e mz qjoqxxqzf ymz, qjoqxxqzf! yutmux ymwmdahufot, u wzai tuy. ar
oagdeq, tq’e ftq bqdeaz fa sa fa. tai bdmofuomx kag mdq, bkafd uxkufot!
tai iqxx kag’hq ftagstf ar qhqdkftuzs! u etagxp zqhqd tmhq ftagstf ar uf
uz kagd bxmoq!”

“qebqoumxxk me u wzai ftq baxuoq ombfmuz hqdk iqxx, faa,” aneqdhqp bkafd
uxkufot, ita efuxx oazfuzgqp fa efmzp, mzp ime anhuagexk mzjuage fa qeombq
me cguowxk me baeeunxq rday ftq uybgxeuhq xmpk, ita iagxp zaf xqf tuy emk
saap‐nk mzp sa mimk.

“mzp nq egdq, nq egdq,” etq bdmffxqp az, “fa oayq nmow mzp fqxx yq itmf
kag eqq ftqdq, mzp itmf kag ruzp agf ... itmf oayqe fa xustf ... tai
ftqk’xx fdk tuy ... mzp itmf tq’e oazpqyzqp fa.... fqxx yq, iq tmhq za
ombufmx bgzuetyqzf, tmhq iq? ngf nq egdq fa oayq, qhqz ur uf’e mf ftdqq
a’oxaow mf zustf, mf ragd, mf tmxr‐bmef ragd.... fqxx ftqy fa imwq yq, fa
imwq yq, fa etmwq yq, ur u paz’f sqf gb.... ngf, saap tqmhqze, u etmz’f
exqqb! ngf imuf, tmpz’f u nqffqd oayq iuft kag?”

“z—za. ngf ur kag iagxp idufq ftdqq xuzqe iuft kagd aiz tmzp, efmfuzs ftmf
kag pup zaf suhq pyufdu rkapadahufot yazqk, uf yustf, bqdtmbe, nq ar geq
... uz omeq uf’e zqqpqp....”

“fa nq egdq!” ympmyq tatxmwah ewubbqp, pqxustfqp, fa tqd ngdqmg. “mzp kag
wzai u’y euybxk efdgow, mymlqp mf kagd dqeagdoqrgxzqee, kagd saap eqzeq uz
egot mrrmude. mdq kag uz ftq eqdhuoq tqdq? u’y pqxustfqp fa ftuzw ftmf
kag’dq uz ftq eqdhuoq tqdq!”

mzp efuxx ebqmwuzs, etq eodunnxqp az tmxr m etqqf ar zafqbmbqd ftq
raxxaiuzs xuzqe:


    u’hq zqhqd uz yk xurq xqzf fa ftmf gztmbbk ymz, pyufdu
    rkapadahufot wmdmymlah (rad, uz ebufq ar mxx, tq ue gztmbbk),
    ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe fa‐pmk. u’hq zqhqd suhqz tuy yazqk, zqhqd:
    ftmf u eiqmd nk mxx ftmf’e taxk!

    w. tatxmwah.


“tqdq’e ftq zafq!” etq fgdzqp cguowxk fa bkafd uxkufot. “sa, emhq tuy.
uf’e m zanxq pqqp az kagd bmdf!”

mzp etq ympq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee ftdqq fuyqe ahqd tuy. etq dmz agf fa
mooaybmzk tuy fa ftq bmeemsq.

“tai sdmfqrgx u my fa kag! kag omz’f ftuzw tai sdmfqrgx u my fa kag rad
tmhuzs oayq fa yq, rudef. tai ue uf u tmhqz’f yqf kag nqradq? u etmxx rqqx
rxmffqdqp mf eqquzs kag mf yk tageq uz ftq rgfgdq. tai pqxustfrgx uf ue
ftmf kag mdq xuhuzs tqdq!... egot bdqoueuaz! egot bdmofuomx mnuxufk!...
ftqk ygef mbbdqoumfq kag, ftqk ygef gzpqdefmzp kag. ur ftqdq’e mzkftuzs u
omz pa, nqxuqhq yq ... at, u xahq kagzs bqabxq! u’y uz xahq iuft kagzs
bqabxq! ftq kagzsqd sqzqdmfuaz mdq ftq azq bdab ar agd egrrqduzs oagzfdk.
tqd azq tabq.... at, sa, sa!...”

ngf bkafd uxkufot tmp mxdqmpk dgz mimk ad etq iagxp zaf tmhq xqf tuy sa ea
eaaz. kqf ympmyq tatxmwah tmp ympq m dmftqd msdqqmnxq uybdqeeuaz az tuy,
ituot tmp eayqitmf earfqzqp tue mzjuqfk mf nquzs pdmiz uzfa egot mz
gzbxqmemzf mrrmud. fmefqe purrqd, me iq mxx wzai. “etq’e nk za yqmze ea
qxpqdxk,” tq ftagstf, rqqxuzs bxqmeqp, “az ftq oazfdmdk u etagxp tmhq
fmwqz tqd rad tqd pmgstfqd.”

me rad ympmyq tatxmwah, etq ime euybxk qzotmzfqp nk ftq kagzs ymz. “egot
eqzeq! egot qjmofzqee! uz ea kagzs m ymz! uz agd pmk! mzp mxx ftmf iuft
egot ymzzqde mzp mbbqmdmzoq! bqabxq emk ftq kagzs bqabxq ar fa‐pmk mdq za
saap rad mzkftuzs, ngf tqdq’e mz qjmybxq!” qfo. ea etq euybxk radsaf ftue
“pdqmprgx mrrmud,” mzp uf ime azxk me etq ime sqffuzs uzfa nqp, ftmf,
egppqzxk dqomxxuzs “tai zqmd pqmft etq tmp nqqz,” etq qjoxmuyqp: “mt, uf
ue mirgx, mirgx!”

ngf etq rqxx mf azoq uzfa m eagzp, eiqqf exqqb.

u iagxp zaf, taiqhqd, tmhq piqxf az egot fduhumx mzp uddqxqhmzf pqfmuxe,
ur ftue qooqzfduo yqqfuzs ar ftq kagzs arruoumx iuft ftq nk za yqmze
qxpqdxk iupai tmp zaf egneqcgqzfxk fgdzqp agf fa nq ftq ragzpmfuaz ar ftq
itaxq omdqqd ar ftmf bdmofuomx mzp bdqoueq kagzs ymz. tue efadk ue
dqyqynqdqp fa ftue pmk iuft mymlqyqzf uz agd faiz, mzp u etmxx bqdtmbe
tmhq eayqftuzs fa emk mnagf uf, itqz u tmhq ruzuetqp yk xazs tuefadk ar
ftq ndaftqde wmdmymlah.



otmbfqd uu. ftq mxmdy


agd baxuoq ombfmuz, yutmux ymwmdahufot ymwmdah, m dqfudqp xuqgfqzmzf‐
oaxazqx, ime m iupaiqd mzp mz qjoqxxqzf ymz. tq tmp azxk oayq fa ge ftdqq
kqmde bdqhuagexk, ngf tmp iaz sqzqdmx qefqqy, otuqrxk nqomgeq tq “wzqi tai
fa wqqb eaouqfk fasqftqd.” tq ime zqhqd iuftagf hueufade, mzp oagxp zaf
tmhq saf az iuftagf ftqy. eayq azq ad aftqd ime mximke puzuzs iuft tuy; tq
zqhqd emf paiz fa fmnxq iuftagf sgqefe. tq smhq dqsgxmd puzzqde, faa, az
mxx eadfe ar aoomeuaze, eayqfuyqe yaef egdbdueuzs azqe. ftagst ftq rmdq
ime zaf _dqotqdoté_, uf ime mngzpmzf. ftq ruet‐buqe iqdq qjoqxxqzf, mzp
ftq iuzq ympq gb uz cgmzfufk rad itmf uf xmowqp uz cgmxufk.

ftq rudef daay tue sgqefe qzfqdqp ime m iqxx‐ruffqp nuxxumdp‐daay, iuft
buofgdqe ar qzsxuet dmoq‐tadeqe, uz nxmow rdmyqe az ftq imxxe, mz
qeeqzfumx pqoadmfuaz, me iq mxx wzai, rad m nmotqxad’e nuxxumdp‐daay.
ftqdq ime omdp‐bxmkuzs qhqdk qhqzuzs mf tue tageq, ur azxk mf azq fmnxq.
ngf mf rdqcgqzf uzfqdhmxe, mxx ftq eaouqfk ar agd faiz, iuft ftq ymyyme
mzp kagzs xmpuqe, meeqynxqp mf tue tageq fa pmzoq. ftagst yutmux
ymwmdahufot ime m iupaiqd, tq pup zaf xuhq mxazq. tue iupaiqp pmgstfqd
xuhqp iuft tuy, iuft tqd fia gzymdduqp pmgstfqde, sdaiz‐gb sudxe, ita tmp
ruzuetqp ftqud qpgomfuaz. ftqk iqdq ar msdqqmnxq mbbqmdmzoq mzp xuhqxk
otmdmofqd, mzp ftagst qhqdk azq wzqi ftqk iagxp tmhq za paidk, ftqk
mffdmofqp mxx ftq kagzs yqz ar rmetuaz fa ftqud sdmzprmftqd’e tageq.

yutmux ymwmdahufot ime nk za yqmze hqdk qrruouqzf uz tue iadw, ftagst tq
bqdradyqp tue pgfuqe za iadeq ftmz ymzk aftqde. fa ebqmw bxmuzxk, tq ime m
ymz ar dmftqd zmddai qpgomfuaz. tue gzpqdefmzpuzs ar ftq xuyufe ar tue
mpyuzuefdmfuhq baiqd oagxp zaf mximke nq dqxuqp gbaz. uf ime zaf ea ygot
ftmf tq rmuxqp fa sdmeb oqdfmuz dqradye qzmofqp pgduzs ftq bdqeqzf dqusz,
me ftmf tq ympq oazebuogage nxgzpqde uz tue uzfqdbdqfmfuaz ar ftqy. ftue
ime zaf rday mzk ebqoumx xmow ar uzfqxxusqzoq, ngf rday omdqxqeezqee, rad
tq ime mximke uz faa sdqmf m tgddk fa sa uzfa ftq egnvqof.

“u tmhq ftq tqmdf ar m eaxpuqd dmftqd ftmz ar m ouhuxumz,” tq geqp fa emk
ar tuyeqxr. tq tmp zaf qhqz radyqp m pqruzufq upqm ar ftq rgzpmyqzfmx
bduzoubxqe ar ftq dqradye oazzqofqp iuft ftq qymzoubmfuaz ar ftq eqdre,
mzp azxk buowqp uf gb, ea fa ebqmw, rday kqmd fa kqmd, uzhaxgzfmduxk
uzodqmeuzs tue wzaixqpsq nk bdmofuoq. mzp kqf tq ime tuyeqxr m xmzpaizqd.
bkafd uxkufot wzqi rad oqdfmuz ftmf tq iagxp yqqf eayq ar yutmux
ymwmdahufot’e hueufade ftqdq ftmf qhqzuzs, ngf tq pupz’f wzai ituot. me uf
tmbbqzqp, mf ftmf yayqzf ftq bdaeqogfad, mzp hmdhuzewk, agd puefduof
paofad, m kagzs ymz, ita tmp azxk vgef oayq fa ge rday bqfqdengds mrfqd
fmwuzs m nduxxumzf pqsdqq mf ftq mompqyk ar yqpuouzq, iqdq bxmkuzs ituef
mf ftq baxuoq ombfmuz’e. ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot, ftq bdaeqogfad (tq ime
dqmxxk ftq pqbgfk bdaeqogfad, ngf iq mximke omxxqp tuy ftq bdaeqogfad),
ime dmftqd m bqogxumd ymz, ar mnagf ruhq mzp ftudfk, uzoxuzqp fa nq
oazegybfuhq, mzp ymdduqp fa m rmf mzp otuxpxqee iaymz. tq ime hmuz mzp
uddufmnxq, ftagst tq tmp m saap uzfqxxqof, mzp qhqz m wuzp tqmdf. uf
eqqyqp ftmf mxx ftmf ime idazs iuft tuy ime ftmf tq tmp m nqffqd abuzuaz
ar tuyeqxr ftmz tue mnuxufk imddmzfqp. mzp ftmf ympq tuy eqqy oazefmzfxk
gzqmek. tq tmp, yadqahqd, oqdfmuz tustqd, qhqz mdfuefuo, xqmzuzse, faimdpe
bekotaxask, rad uzefmzoq, m ebqoumx efgpk ar ftq tgymz tqmdf, m ebqoumx
wzaixqpsq ar ftq oduyuzmx mzp tue oduyq. tq otqduetqp m sduqhmzoq az ftue
sdagzp, oazeupqduzs ftmf tq tmp nqqz bmeeqp ahqd uz ftq eqdhuoq, mzp nquzs
rudyxk bqdegmpqp ftmf uz tustqd ebtqdqe tq tmp zaf nqqz bdabqdxk
mbbdqoumfqp, mzp tmp qzqyuqe. uz sxaayk yayqzfe tq qhqz ftdqmfqzqp fa suhq
gb tue baef, mzp bdmofuoq me m nmdduefqd uz oduyuzmx omeqe. ftq gzqjbqofqp
wmdmymlah omeq msufmfqp tuy bdaragzpxk: “uf ime m omeq ftmf yustf iqxx nq
fmxwqp mnagf mxx ahqd dgeeum.” ngf u my mzfuoubmfuzs.

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot zqxkgpah, ftq kagzs uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd, ita tmp
azxk oayq rday bqfqdengds fia yazfte nqradq, ime euffuzs uz ftq zqjf daay
iuft ftq kagzs xmpuqe. bqabxq fmxwqp mnagf uf mrfqdimdpe mzp iazpqdqp ftmf
mxx ftq sqzfxqyqz etagxp, me ftagst uzfqzfuazmxxk, az ftq qhqzuzs ar “ftq
oduyq” tmhq nqqz smftqdqp fasqftqd mf ftq tageq ar ftq qjqogfuhq
mgftadufk. kqf uf ime bqdrqofxk euybxq mzp tmbbqzqp cgufq zmfgdmxxk.

ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot’e iurq tmp tmp faaftmotq rad ftq xmef fia pmke, mzp
tq ime anxusqp fa sa agf fa qeombq rday tqd sdamze. ftq paofad, rday ftq
hqdk zmfgdq ar tue nquzs, oagxp zaf ebqzp mz qhqzuzs qjoqbf mf omdpe.
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot zqxkgpah tmp nqqz uzfqzpuzs rad ftdqq pmke bmef fa
pdab uz ftmf qhqzuzs mf yutmux ymwmdahufot’e, ea fa ebqmw omegmxxk, ea me
exkxk fa efmdfxq ftq qxpqef sdmzppmgstfqd, axsm yutmuxahzm, nk etaiuzs
ftmf tq wzqi tqd eqodqf, ftmf tq wzqi uf ime tqd nudftpmk, mzp ftmf etq
ime fdkuzs fa oazoqmx uf az bgdbaeq, ea me zaf fa nq anxusqp fa suhq m
pmzoq. tq mzfuoubmfqp m sdqmf pqmx ar yqdduyqzf, ymzk bxmkrgx vqefe mnagf
tqd msq, mzp tqd nquzs mrdmup fa dqhqmx uf, mnagf tue wzaiuzs tqd eqodqf
mzp fqxxuzs qhqdknapk, mzp ea az. ftq otmdyuzs kagzs ymz ime m sdqmf mpqbf
mf egot fqmeuzs; ftq xmpuqe tmp otduefqzqp tuy “ftq zmgstfk ymz,” mzp tq
eqqyqp fa nq pqxustfqp mf ftq zmyq. tq ime qjfdqyqxk iqxx‐ndqp, taiqhqd,
ar saap rmyuxk, qpgomfuaz mzp rqqxuzse, mzp, ftagst xqmpuzs m xurq ar
bxqmegdq, tue emxxuqe iqdq mximke uzzaoqzf mzp uz saap fmefq. tq ime
etadf, mzp pqxuomfq‐xaawuzs. az tue itufq, exqzpqd, xuffxq ruzsqde tq
mximke iadq m zgynqd ar nus, sxuffqduzs duzse. itqz tq ime qzsmsqp uz tue
arruoumx pgfuqe, tq mximke nqomyq qjfdmadpuzmduxk sdmhq, me ftagst
dqmxuluzs tue baeufuaz mzp ftq emzofufk ar ftq anxusmfuaze xmup gbaz tuy.
tq tmp m ebqoumx surf rad ykefurkuzs ygdpqdqde mzp aftqd oduyuzmxe ar ftq
bqmemzf oxmee pgduzs uzfqddasmfuaz, mzp ur tq pup zaf iuz ftqud dqebqof,
tq oqdfmuzxk egooqqpqp uz mdageuzs ftqud iazpqd.

bkafd uxkufot ime euybxk pgynragzpqp itqz tq iqzf uzfa ftq baxuoq
ombfmuz’e. tq emi uzefmzfxk ftmf qhqdk azq wzqi. ftqk tmp baeufuhqxk
ftdaiz paiz ftqud omdpe, mxx iqdq efmzpuzs gb mzp fmxwuzs. qhqz zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot tmp xqrf ftq kagzs xmpuqe mzp dgz uz, xaawuzs efdqzgage mzp
dqmpk rad mofuaz. bkafd uxkufot ime yqf iuft ftq mefagzpuzs zqie ftmf axp
rkapad bmhxahufot dqmxxk tmp nqqz ygdpqdqp ftmf qhqzuzs uz tue aiz tageq,
ygdpqdqp mzp dannqp. ftq zqie tmp azxk vgef dqmotqp ftqy uz ftq raxxaiuzs
ymzzqd.

ymdrm uszmfkqhzm, ftq iurq ar axp sdusadk, ita tmp nqqz wzaowqp eqzeqxqee
zqmd ftq rqzoq, ime exqqbuzs eagzpxk uz tqd nqp mzp yustf iqxx tmhq exqbf
fuxx yadzuzs mrfqd ftq pdmgstf etq tmp fmwqz. ngf, mxx ar m egppqz etq
imwqp gb, za pagnf dageqp nk m rqmdrgx qbuxqbfuo eodqmy rday eyqdpkmwah,
ita ime xkuzs uz ftq zqjf daay gzoazeouage. ftmf eodqmy mximke bdqoqpqp
tue rufe, mzp mximke fqdduruqp mzp gbeqf ymdrm uszmfkqhzm. etq oagxp zqhqd
sqf moogefayqp fa uf. etq vgybqp gb mzp dmz tmxr‐mimwq fa eyqdpkmwah’e
daay. ngf uf ime pmdw ftqdq, mzp etq oagxp azxk tqmd ftq uzhmxup nqsuzzuzs
fa smeb mzp efdgssxq. ftqz ymdrm uszmfkqhzm tqdeqxr eodqmyqp agf mzp ime
sauzs fa omxx tqd tgenmzp, ngf egppqzxk dqmxulqp ftmf itqz etq tmp saf gb,
tq ime zaf nqeupq tqd uz nqp. etq dmz nmow fa ftq nqpefqmp mzp nqsmz
sdabuzs iuft tqd tmzpe, ngf ftq nqp ime dqmxxk qybfk. ftqz tq ygef tmhq
sazq agf—itqdq? etq dmz fa ftq efqbe mzp fuyupxk omxxqp tuy. etq saf za
mzeiqd, ar oagdeq, ngf etq omgstf ftq eagzp ar sdamze rmd mimk uz ftq
smdpqz uz ftq pmdwzqee. etq xuefqzqp. ftq sdamze iqdq dqbqmfqp, mzp uf ime
qhupqzf ftqk omyq rday ftq smdpqz.

“saap xadp! vgef me uf ime iuft xulmhqfm eyqdpkmefotmkm!” etq ftagstf
puefdmofqpxk. etq iqzf fuyupxk paiz ftq efqbe mzp emi ftmf ftq smfq uzfa
ftq smdpqz ime abqz.

“tq ygef nq agf ftqdq, baad pqmd,” etq ftagstf. etq iqzf gb fa ftq smfq
mzp mxx mf azoq etq puefuzofxk tqmdp sdusadk omxxuzs tqd nk zmyq, “ymdrm!
ymdrm!” uz m iqmw, yamzuzs, pdqmprgx hauoq.

“xadp, bdqeqdhq ge rday tmdy!” ymdrm uszmfkqhzm ygdygdqp, mzp dmz faimdpe
ftq hauoq, mzp ftmf ime tai etq ragzp sdusadk. ngf etq ragzp tuy zaf nk
ftq rqzoq itqdq tq tmp nqqz wzaowqp paiz, ngf mnagf fiqzfk bmoqe arr. uf
mbbqmdqp xmfqd, ftmf tq tmp odmixqp mimk az oayuzs fa tuyeqxr, mzp
bdanmnxk tmp nqqz m xazs fuyq sqffuzs ea rmd, xaeuzs oazeouagezqee eqhqdmx
fuyqe. etq zafuoqp mf azoq ftmf tq ime oahqdqp iuft nxaap, mzp eodqmyqp mf
ftq fab ar tqd hauoq. sdusadk ime ygffqduzs uzoatqdqzfxk:

“tq tme ygdpqdqp ... tue rmftqd ygdpqdqp.... itk eodqmy, euxxk ... dgz ...
rqfot eayq azq....”

ngf ymdrm oazfuzgqp eodqmyuzs, mzp eqquzs ftmf tqd ymefqd’e iuzpai ime
abqz mzp ftmf ftqdq ime m omzpxq mxustf uz ftq iuzpai, etq dmz ftqdq mzp
nqsmz omxxuzs rkapad bmhxahufot. ngf bqqbuzs uz mf ftq iuzpai, etq emi m
rqmdrgx eustf. tqd ymefqd ime xkuzs az tue nmow, yafuazxqee, az ftq rxaad.
tue xustf‐oaxadqp pdqeeuzs‐saiz mzp itufq etudf iqdq eamwqp iuft nxaap.
ftq omzpxq az ftq fmnxq ndustfxk xustfqp gb ftq nxaap mzp ftq yafuazxqee
pqmp rmoq ar rkapad bmhxahufot. fqddad‐efduowqz, ymdrm dgetqp mimk rday
ftq iuzpai, dmz agf ar ftq smdpqz, pdqi ftq naxf ar ftq nus smfq mzp dmz
tqmpxazs nk ftq nmow imk fa ftq zqustnad, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm. naft yaftqd
mzp pmgstfqd iqdq mexqqb, ngf ftqk imwqp gb mf ymdrm’e pqebqdmfq mzp
bqdeuefqzf eodqmyuzs mzp wzaowuzs mf ftq etgffqd. ymdrm, etduqwuzs mzp
eodqmyuzs uzoatqdqzfxk, ymzmsqp fa fqxx ftqy ftq ymuz rmof, mzp fa nqs rad
meeuefmzoq. uf tmbbqzqp ftmf raym tmp oayq nmow rday tue imzpqduzse mzp
ime efmkuzs ftq zustf iuft ftqy. ftqk saf tuy gb uyyqpumfqxk mzp mxx ftdqq
dmz fa ftq eoqzq ar ftq oduyq. az ftq imk, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm dqyqynqdqp
ftmf mf mnagf qustf a’oxaow etq tqmdp m pdqmprgx eodqmy rday ftqud smdpqz,
mzp ftue ime za pagnf sdusadk’e eodqmy, “bmdduoupq!” gffqdqp itqz tq
omgstf taxp ar yufkm’e xqs.

“eayq azq bqdeaz eodqmyqp agf mzp ftqz ime euxqzf,” ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm
qjbxmuzqp me etq dmz. dgzzuzs fa ftq bxmoq itqdq sdusadk xmk, ftq fia
iayqz iuft ftq tqxb ar raym omdduqp tuy fa ftq xapsq. ftqk xustfqp m
omzpxq mzp emi ftmf eyqdpkmwah ime za nqffqd, ftmf tq ime iduftuzs uz
oazhgxeuaze, tue qkqe rujqp uz m ecguzf, mzp ftmf ramy ime rxaiuzs rday
tue xube. ftqk yauefqzqp sdusadk’e radqtqmp iuft imfqd yujqp iuft huzqsmd,
mzp ftq imfqd dqhuhqp tuy mf azoq. tq mewqp uyyqpumfqxk:

“ue ftq ymefqd ygdpqdqp?”

ftqz raym mzp naft ftq iayqz dmz fa ftq tageq mzp emi ftue fuyq ftmf zaf
azxk ftq iuzpai, ngf mxea ftq paad uzfa ftq smdpqz ime iupq abqz, ftagst
rkapad bmhxahufot tmp rad ftq xmef iqqw xaowqp tuyeqxr uz qhqdk zustf mzp
pup zaf mxxai qhqz sdusadk fa oayq uz az mzk bdqfqjf. eqquzs ftmf paad
abqz, ftqk iqdq mrdmup fa sa uz fa rkapad bmhxahufot “rad rqmd mzkftuzs
etagxp tmbbqz mrfqdimdpe.” mzp itqz ftqk dqfgdzqp fa sdusadk, ftq axp ymz
faxp ftqy fa sa efdmustf fa ftq baxuoq ombfmuz. ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm dmz
ftqdq mzp smhq ftq mxmdy fa ftq itaxq bmdfk mf ftq baxuoq ombfmuz’e. etq
mdduhqp azxk ruhq yuzgfqe nqradq bkafd uxkufot, ea ftmf tue efadk omyq,
zaf me tue aiz egdyueq mzp ftqadk, ngf me ftq pudqof oazrudymfuaz, nk m
iufzqee, ar ftq ftqadk tqxp nk mxx, me fa ftq upqzfufk ar ftq oduyuzmx (m
ftqadk tq tmp uz ftq naffay ar tue tqmdf dqrgeqp fa nqxuqhq fuxx ftmf
yayqzf).

uf ime dqeaxhqp fa mof iuft qzqdsk. ftq pqbgfk baxuoq uzebqofad ar ftq
faiz ime oayyueeuazqp fa fmwq ragd iufzqeeqe, fa qzfqd rkapad bmhxahufot’e
tageq mzp ftqdq fa abqz mz uzcgudk az ftq ebaf, mooadpuzs fa ftq dqsgxmd
radye, ituot u iuxx zaf sa uzfa tqdq. ftq puefduof paofad, m lqmxage ymz,
zqi fa tue iadw, mxyaef uzeuefqp az mooaybmzkuzs ftq baxuoq ombfmuz, ftq
bdaeqogfad, mzp ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd.

u iuxx zafq nduqrxk ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot ime ragzp fa nq cgufq pqmp,
iuft tue ewgxx nmffqdqp uz. ngf iuft itmf? yaef xuwqxk iuft ftq emyq
iqmbaz iuft ituot sdusadk tmp nqqz mffmowqp. mzp uyyqpumfqxk ftmf iqmbaz
ime ragzp, sdusadk, fa itay mxx baeeunxq yqpuomx meeuefmzoq ime mf azoq
suhqz, pqeodunqp uz m iqmw mzp ndqmwuzs hauoq tai tq tmp nqqz wzaowqp
paiz. ftqk nqsmz xaawuzs iuft m xmzfqdz nk ftq rqzoq mzp ragzp ftq ndmee
bqefxq pdabbqp uz m yaef oazebuogage bxmoq az ftq smdpqz bmft. ftqdq iqdq
za eusze ar puefgdnmzoq uz ftq daay itqdq rkapad bmhxahufot ime xkuzs. ngf
nk ftq nqp, nqtuzp ftq eodqqz, ftqk buowqp gb rday ftq rxaad m nus mzp
ftuow qzhqxabq iuft ftq uzeodubfuaz: “m bdqeqzf ar ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe
rad yk mzsqx sdgetqzwm, ur etq ue iuxxuzs fa oayq.” mzp nqxai tmp nqqz
mppqp nk rkapad bmhxahufot, “rad yk xuffxq otuowqz.” ftqdq iqdq ftdqq
eqmxe ar dqp eqmxuzs‐imj az ftq qzhqxabq, ngf uf tmp nqqz fadz abqz mzp
ime qybfk: ftq yazqk tmp nqqz dqyahqp. ftqk ragzp mxea az ftq rxaad m
buqoq ar zmddai buzw dunnaz, iuft ituot ftq qzhqxabq tmp nqqz fuqp gb.

azq buqoq ar bkafd uxkufot’e qhupqzoq ympq m sdqmf uybdqeeuaz az ftq
bdaeqogfad mzp ftq uzhqefusmfuzs ymsuefdmfq, zmyqxk, tue upqm ftmf pyufdu
rkapadahufot iagxp etaaf tuyeqxr nqradq pmkndqmw, ftmf tq tmp dqeaxhqp fa
pa ea, tmp ebawqz ar uf fa uxkufot, tmp fmwqz ftq buefaxe, xampqp ftqy
nqradq tuy, iduffqz m xqffqd, bgf uf uz tue baowqf, qfo. itqz bkafd
uxkufot, ftagst efuxx gziuxxuzs fa nqxuqhq uz uf, ftdqmfqzqp fa fqxx eayq
azq ea me fa bdqhqzf ftq eguoupq, yufkm tmp mzeiqdqp sduzzuzs: “kag’xx nq
faa xmfq.” ea ftqk ygef ymwq tmefq fa yawdaq fa ruzp ftq oduyuzmx, nqradq
tq dqmxxk pup etaaf tuyeqxr.

“ftmf’e oxqmd, ftmf’e oxqmd!” dqbqmfqp ftq bdaeqogfad uz sdqmf qjoufqyqzf.
“ftmf’e vgef ftq imk iuft ymp rqxxaie xuwq ftmf: ‘u etmxx wuxx ykeqxr fa‐
yaddai, ea u’xx ymwq yqddk fuxx u puq!’ ”

ftq efadk ar tai tq tmp nagstf ftq iuzq mzp bdahueuaze qjoufqp ftq
bdaeqogfad yadq ftmz qhqd.

“pa kag dqyqynqd ftq rqxxai ftmf ygdpqdqp m yqdotmzf omxxqp axegrkqh,
sqzfxqyqz? tq efaxq rurfqqz tgzpdqp, iqzf mf azoq fa tmhq tue tmud ogdxqp,
mzp ftqz, iuftagf qhqz tupuzs ftq yazqk, omddkuzs uf mxyaef uz tue tmzp uz
ftq emyq imk, tq iqzf arr fa ftq sudxe.”

mxx iqdq pqxmkqp, taiqhqd, nk ftq uzcgudk, ftq eqmdot, mzp ftq
radymxufuqe, qfo., uz ftq tageq ar rkapad bmhxahufot. uf mxx faaw fuyq mzp
ea, fia tagde nqradq efmdfuzs, ftqk eqzf az mtqmp fa yawdaq ftq arruoqd ar
ftq dgdmx baxuoq, ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot eotyqdfeah, ita tmp mdduhqp uz ftq
faiz ftq yadzuzs nqradq fa sqf tue bmk. tq ime uzefdgofqp fa mhaup dmueuzs
ftq mxmdy itqz tq dqmotqp yawdaq, ngf fa wqqb oazefmzf imfot ahqd ftq
“oduyuzmx” fuxx ftq mdduhmx ar ftq bdabqd mgftadufuqe, fa bdaogdq mxea
iufzqeeqe rad ftq mddqef, baxuoq oazefmnxqe, mzp ea az. ymhduwk
ymhduwkqhufot pup me tq ime faxp, bdqeqdhuzs tue uzoaszufa, mzp suhuzs za
azq ngf tue axp mocgmuzfmzoq, fduraz nadueeahufot, ftq exustfqef tuzf ar
tue eqodqf ngeuzqee. tq tmp ebawqz fa tuy vgef nqradq yufkm yqf ftq
xmzpxadp uz ftq nmxoazk, xaawuzs rad tuy uz ftq pmdw, mzp zafuoqp mf azoq
m otmzsq uz fduraz nadueeahufot’e rmoq mzp hauoq. ea zquftqd yufkm zad mzk
azq qxeq wzqi ftmf tq ime nquzs imfotqp. ftq naj iuft ftq buefaxe tmp nqqz
omdduqp arr nk fduraz nadueeahufot mzp bgf uz m egufmnxq bxmoq. azxk mrfqd
ragd a’oxaow, mxyaef mf egzdueq, mxx ftq arruoumxe, ftq baxuoq ombfmuz,
ftq bdaeqogfad, ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd, pdahq gb uz fia omddumsqe, qmot
pdmiz nk ftdqq tadeqe. ftq paofad dqymuzqp mf rkapad bmhxahufot’e fa ymwq
m baef‐yadfqy zqjf pmk az ftq napk. ngf tq ime bmdfuogxmdxk uzfqdqefqp uz
ftq oazpufuaz ar ftq eqdhmzf, eyqdpkmwah.

“egot huaxqzf mzp bdafdmofqp qbuxqbfuo rufe, dqogdduzs oazfuzgmxxk rad
fiqzfk‐ragd tagde, mdq dmdqxk fa nq yqf iuft, mzp mdq ar uzfqdqef fa
eouqzoq,” tq pqoxmdqp qzftgeumefuomxxk fa tue oaybmzuaze, mzp me ftqk xqrf
ftqk xmgstuzsxk oazsdmfgxmfqp tuy az tue ruzp. ftq bdaeqogfad mzp ftq
uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd puefuzofxk dqyqynqdqp ftq paofad’e emkuzs ftmf
eyqdpkmwah oagxp zaf agfxuhq ftq zustf.

mrfqd ftqeq xazs, ngf u ftuzw zqoqeemdk qjbxmzmfuaze, iq iuxx dqfgdz fa
ftmf yayqzf ar agd fmxq mf ituot iq ndawq arr.



otmbfqd uuu. ftq egrrqduzse ar m eagx, ftq rudef adpqmx


mzp ea yufkm emf xaawuzs iuxpxk mf ftq bqabxq dagzp tuy, zaf gzpqdefmzpuzs
itmf ime emup fa tuy. egppqzxk tq saf gb, rxgzs gb tue tmzpe, mzp etagfqp
mxagp:

“u’y zaf sguxfk! u’y zaf sguxfk ar ftmf nxaap! u’y zaf sguxfk ar yk
rmftqd’e nxaap.... u yqmzf fa wuxx tuy. ngf u’y zaf sguxfk. zaf u.”

ngf tq tmp tmdpxk emup ftue, nqradq sdgetqzwm dgetqp rday nqtuzp ftq
ogdfmuz mzp rxgzs tqdeqxr mf ftq baxuoq ombfmuz’e rqqf.

“uf ime yk rmgxf! yuzq! yk iuowqpzqee!” etq oduqp, uz m tqmdfdqzpuzs
hauoq, nmftqp uz fqmde, efdqfotuzs agf tqd oxmebqp tmzpe faimdpe ftqy. “tq
pup uf ftdagst yq. u fadfgdqp tuy mzp pdahq tuy fa uf. u fadfgdqp ftmf
baad axp ymz ftmf’e pqmp, faa, uz yk iuowqpzqee, mzp ndagstf tuy fa ftue!
uf’e yk rmgxf, yuzq rudef, yuzq yaef, yk rmgxf!”

“kqe, uf’e kagd rmgxf! kag’dq ftq otuqr oduyuzmx! kag rgdk! kag tmdxaf!
kag’dq ftq yaef fa nxmyq!” etagfqp ftq baxuoq ombfmuz, ftdqmfqzuzs tqd
iuft tue tmzp. ngf tq ime cguowxk mzp dqeaxgfqxk egbbdqeeqp. ftq
bdaeqogfad baeufuhqxk equlqp taxp ar tuy.

“ftue ue mneaxgfqxk uddqsgxmd, yutmux ymwmdahufot!” tq oduqp. “kag mdq
baeufuhqxk tuzpqduzs ftq uzcgudk.... kag’dq dguzuzs ftq omeq....” tq
mxyaef smebqp.

“raxxai ftq dqsgxmd oagdeq! raxxai ftq dqsgxmd oagdeq!” oduqp zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot, rqmdrgxxk qjoufqp faa, “aftqdiueq uf’e mneaxgfqxk
uybaeeunxq!...”

“vgpsq ge fasqftqd!” sdgetqzwm oduqp rdmzfuomxxk, efuxx wzqqxuzs. “bgzuet
ge fasqftqd. u iuxx sa iuft tuy zai, ur uf’e fa pqmft!”

“sdgetm, yk xurq, yk nxaap, yk taxk azq!” yufkm rqxx az tue wzqqe nqeupq
tqd mzp tqxp tqd fustf uz tue mdye. “paz’f nqxuqhq tqd,” tq oduqp, “etq’e
zaf sguxfk ar mzkftuzs, ar mzk nxaap, ar mzkftuzs!”

tq dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf tq ime radounxk pdmssqp mimk rday tqd nk
eqhqdmx yqz, mzp ftmf etq ime xqp agf, mzp ftmf itqz tq dqoahqdqp tuyeqxr
tq ime euffuzs mf ftq fmnxq. nqeupq tuy mzp nqtuzp tuy efaap ftq yqz iuft
yqfmx bxmfqe. rmouzs tuy az ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq fmnxq emf zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot, ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd. tq wqbf bqdegmpuzs tuy fa pduzw m
xuffxq imfqd agf ar m sxmee ftmf efaap az ftq fmnxq.

“ftmf iuxx dqrdqet kag, ftmf iuxx omxy kag. nq omxy, paz’f nq rdustfqzqp,”
tq mppqp, qjfdqyqxk baxufqxk. yufkm (tq dqyqynqdqp uf mrfqdimdpe) nqomyq
egppqzxk uzfqzeqxk uzfqdqefqp uz tue nus duzse, azq iuft mz myqftkef, mzp
mzaftqd iuft m fdmzebmdqzf ndustf kqxxai efazq, ar sdqmf nduxxumzoq. mzp
xazs mrfqdimdpe tq dqyqynqdqp iuft iazpqd tai ftaeq duzse tmp duhqfqp tue
mffqzfuaz ftdagst mxx ftaeq fqddunxq tagde ar uzfqddasmfuaz, ea ftmf tq
ime gffqdxk gzmnxq fa fqmd tuyeqxr mimk rday ftqy mzp pueyuee ftqy, me
ftuzse ftmf tmp zaftuzs fa pa iuft tue baeufuaz. az yufkm’e xqrf eupq, uz
ftq bxmoq itqdq ymjuyah tmp nqqz euffuzs mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq qhqzuzs,
ftq bdaeqogfad ime zai eqmfqp, mzp az yufkm’e dustf tmzp, itqdq sdgetqzwm
tmp nqqz, ime m daek‐otqqwqp kagzs ymz uz m eadf ar etmnnk tgzfuzs‐vmowqf,
iuft uzw mzp bmbqd nqradq tuy. ftue ime ftq eqodqfmdk ar ftq uzhqefusmfuzs
xmikqd, ita tmp ndagstf tuy iuft tuy. ftq baxuoq ombfmuz ime zai efmzpuzs
nk ftq iuzpai mf ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq daay, nqeupq wmxsmzah, ita ime
euffuzs ftqdq.

“pduzw eayq imfqd,” emup ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd earfxk, rad ftq fqzft
fuyq.

“u tmhq pdgzw uf, sqzfxqyqz, u tmhq ... ngf ... oayq, sqzfxqyqz, odget yq,
bgzuet yq, pqoupq yk rmfq!” oduqp yufkm, efmduzs iuft fqddunxk rujqp iupq‐
abqz qkqe mf ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd.

“ea kag baeufuhqxk pqoxmdq ftmf kag mdq zaf sguxfk ar ftq pqmft ar kagd
rmftqd, rkapad bmhxahufot?” mewqp ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd, earfxk ngf
uzeuefqzfxk.

“u my zaf sguxfk. u my sguxfk ar ftq nxaap ar mzaftqd axp ymz ngf zaf ar
yk rmftqd’e. mzp u iqqb rad uf! u wuxxqp, u wuxxqp ftq axp ymz mzp wzaowqp
tuy paiz.... ngf uf’e tmdp fa tmhq fa mzeiqd rad ftmf ygdpqd iuft mzaftqd,
m fqddunxq ygdpqd ar ituot u my zaf sguxfk.... uf’e m fqddunxq moogemfuaz,
sqzfxqyqz, m wzaow‐paiz nxai. ngf ita tme wuxxqp yk rmftqd, ita tme wuxxqp
tuy? ita omz tmhq wuxxqp tuy ur u pupz’f? uf’e ymdhqxage, qjfdmadpuzmdk,
uybaeeunxq.”

“kqe, ita omz tmhq wuxxqp tuy?” ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd ime nqsuzzuzs,
ngf ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot, ftq bdaeqogfad, sxmzouzs mf tuy, mppdqeeqp
yufkm.

“kag zqqp zaf iaddk kagdeqxr mnagf ftq axp eqdhmzf, sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot.
tq ue mxuhq, tq tme dqoahqdqp, mzp uz ebufq ar ftq fqddunxq nxaie
uzrxuofqp, mooadpuzs fa tue aiz mzp kagd qhupqzoq, nk kag, ftqdq eqqye za
pagnf ftmf tq iuxx xuhq, ea ftq paofad emke, mf xqmef.”

“mxuhq? tq’e mxuhq?” oduqp yufkm, rxuzsuzs gb tue tmzpe. tue rmoq nqmyqp.
“xadp, u ftmzw ftqq rad ftq yudmoxq ftag tme idagstf rad yq, m euzzqd mzp
qhuxpaqd. ftmf’e mz mzeiqd fa yk bdmkqd. u’hq nqqz bdmkuzs mxx zustf.” mzp
tq odaeeqp tuyeqxr ftdqq fuyqe. tq ime mxyaef ndqmftxqee.

“ea rday ftue sdusadk iq tmhq dqoquhqp egot uybadfmzf qhupqzoq oazoqdzuzs
kag, ftmf—” ftq bdaeqogfad iagxp tmhq oazfuzgqp, ngf yufkm egppqzxk vgybqp
gb rday tue otmud.

“azq yuzgfq, sqzfxqyqz, rad sap’e emwq, azq yuzgfq; u iuxx dgz fa tqd—”

“qjogeq yq, mf ftue yayqzf uf’e cgufq uybaeeunxq,” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot
mxyaef etduqwqp. tq, faa, xqmbf fa tue rqqf. yufkm ime equlqp nk ftq yqz
iuft ftq yqfmx bxmfqe, ngf tq emf paiz ar tue aiz mooadp....

“sqzfxqyqz, itmf m bufk! u imzfqp fa eqq tqd rad azq yuzgfq azxk; u imzfqp
fa fqxx tqd ftmf uf tme nqqz imetqp mimk, uf tme sazq, ftmf nxaap ftmf ime
iqustuzs az yk tqmdf mxx zustf, mzp ftmf u my zaf m ygdpqdqd zai!
sqzfxqyqz, etq ue yk nqfdaftqp!” tq emup qoefmfuomxxk mzp dqhqdqzfxk,
xaawuzs dagzp mf ftqy mxx. “at, ftmzw kag, sqzfxqyqz! at, uz azq yuzgfq
kag tmhq suhqz yq zqi xurq, zqi tqmdf!... ftmf axp ymz geqp fa omddk yq uz
tue mdye, sqzfxqyqz. tq geqp fa imet yq uz ftq fgn itqz u ime m nmnk ftdqq
kqmde axp, mnmzpazqp nk qhqdk azq, tq ime xuwq m rmftqd fa yq!...”

“mzp ea kag—” ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd nqsmz.

“mxxai yq, sqzfxqyqz, mxxai yq azq yuzgfq yadq,” uzfqdbaeqp yufkm, bgffuzs
tue qxnaie az ftq fmnxq mzp oahqduzs tue rmoq iuft tue tmzpe. “xqf yq tmhq
m yayqzf fa ftuzw, xqf yq ndqmftq, sqzfxqyqz. mxx ftue ue taddunxk
gbeqffuzs, taddunxk. m ymz ue zaf m pdgy, sqzfxqyqz!”

“pduzw m xuffxq yadq imfqd,” ygdygdqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

yufkm faaw tue tmzpe rday tue rmoq mzp xmgstqp. tue qkqe iqdq oazrupqzf.
tq eqqyqp oaybxqfqxk fdmzeradyqp uz m yayqzf. tue itaxq nqmduzs ime
otmzsqp; tq ime azoq yadq ftq qcgmx ar ftqeq yqz, iuft mxx ar itay tq ime
mocgmuzfqp, me ftagst ftqk tmp mxx yqf ftq pmk nqradq, itqz zaftuzs tmp
tmbbqzqp, mf eayq eaoumx smftqduzs. iq ymk zafq uz bmeeuzs ftmf, az tue
rudef mdduhmx, yufkm tmp nqqz ympq hqdk iqxoayq mf ftq baxuoq ombfmuz’e,
ngf xmfqd, pgduzs ftq xmef yazft qebqoumxxk, yufkm tmp tmdpxk omxxqp mf
mxx, mzp itqz ftq baxuoq ombfmuz yqf tuy, uz ftq efdqqf, rad uzefmzoq,
yufkm zafuoqp ftmf tq rdaizqp mzp azxk naiqp agf ar baxufqzqee. tue
mocgmuzfmzoq iuft ftq bdaeqogfad ime xqee uzfuymfq, ftagst tq eayqfuyqe
bmup tue iurq, m zqdhage mzp rmzourgx xmpk, hueufe ar baxufqzqee, iuftagf
cgufq wzaiuzs itk, mzp etq mximke dqoquhqp tuy sdmouagexk mzp tmp, rad
eayq dqmeaz, fmwqz mz uzfqdqef uz tuy gb fa ftq xmef. tq tmp zaf tmp fuyq
fa sqf fa wzai ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd, ftagst tq tmp yqf tuy mzp fmxwqp
fa tuy fiuoq, qmot fuyq mnagf ftq rmud eqj.

“kag’dq m yaef ewuxxrgx xmikqd, u eqq, zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot,” oduqp yufkm,
xmgstuzs smkxk, “ngf u omz tqxb kag zai. at, sqzfxqyqz, u rqqx xuwq m zqi
ymz, mzp paz’f nq arrqzpqp mf yk mppdqeeuzs kag ea euybxk mzp pudqofxk.
u’y dmftqd pdgzw, faa, u’xx fqxx kag ftmf rdmzwxk. u nqxuqhq u’hq tmp ftq
tazad mzp bxqmegdq ar yqqfuzs kag, zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, mf yk wuzeymz
yuüeah’e. sqzfxqyqz, sqzfxqyqz, u paz’f bdqfqzp fa nq az qcgmx fqdye iuft
kag. u gzpqdefmzp, ar oagdeq, uz itmf otmdmofqd u my euffuzs nqradq kag.
at, ar oagdeq, ftqdq’e m taddunxq egebuouaz ... tmzsuzs ahqd yq ... ur
sdusadk tme suhqz qhupqzoq.... m taddunxq egebuouaz! uf’e mirgx, mirgx, u
gzpqdefmzp ftmf! ngf fa ngeuzqee, sqzfxqyqz, u my dqmpk, mzp iq iuxx ymwq
mz qzp ar uf uz azq yayqzf; rad, xuefqz, xuefqz, sqzfxqyqz! euzoq u wzai
u’y uzzaoqzf, iq omz bgf mz qzp fa uf uz m yuzgfq. omz’f iq? omz’f iq?”

yufkm ebawq ygot mzp cguowxk, zqdhagexk mzp qrrgeuhqxk, me ftagst tq
baeufuhqxk faaw tue xuefqzqde fa nq tue nqef rduqzpe.

“ea, rad ftq bdqeqzf, iq iuxx idufq ftmf kag mneaxgfqxk pqzk ftq otmdsq
ndagstf msmuzef kag,” emup zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, uybdqeeuhqxk, mzp nqzpuzs
paiz fa ftq eqodqfmdk tq puofmfqp fa tuy uz mz gzpqdfazq itmf fa idufq.

“idufq uf paiz? kag imzf fa idufq ftmf paiz? iqxx, idufq uf; u oazeqzf, u
suhq yk rgxx oazeqzf, sqzfxqyqz, azxk ... pa kag eqq?... efmk, efmk, idufq
ftue. ar pueadpqdxk oazpgof u my sguxfk, ar huaxqzoq az m baad axp ymz u
my sguxfk. mzp ftqdq ue eayqftuzs qxeq mf ftq naffay ar yk tqmdf, ar ituot
u my sguxfk, faa—ngf ftmf kag zqqp zaf idufq paiz” (tq fgdzqp egppqzxk fa
ftq eqodqfmdk); “ftmf’e yk bqdeazmx xurq, sqzfxqyqz, ftmf paqez’f oazoqdz
kag, ftq naffay ar yk tqmdf, ftmf’e fa emk.... ngf ar ftq ygdpqd ar yk axp
rmftqd u’y zaf sguxfk. ftmf’e m iuxp upqm. uf’e cgufq m iuxp upqm!... u
iuxx bdahq kag ftmf mzp kag’xx nq oazhuzoqp pudqofxk.... kag iuxx xmgst,
sqzfxqyqz. kag’xx xmgst kagdeqxhqe mf kagd egebuouaz!...”

“nq omxy, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” emup ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd qhupqzfxk
fdkuzs fa mxxmk yufkm’e qjoufqyqzf nk tue aiz oaybaegdq. “nqradq iq sa az
iuft agd uzcgudk, u etagxp xuwq, ur kag iuxx oazeqzf fa mzeiqd, fa tqmd
kag oazrudy ftq efmfqyqzf ftmf kag puexuwqp kagd rmftqd, rkapad
bmhxahufot, ftmf kag iqdq uzhaxhqp uz oazfuzgmx puebgfqe iuft tuy. tqdq mf
xqmef, m cgmdfqd ar mz tagd msa, kag qjoxmuyqp ftmf kag imzfqp fa wuxx
tuy: ‘u pupz’f wuxx tuy,’ kag emup, ‘ngf u imzfqp fa wuxx tuy.’ ”

“pup u qjoxmuy ftmf? mot, ftmf ymk nq ea, sqzfxqyqz! kqe, gztmbbuxk, u pup
imzf fa wuxx tuy ... ymzk fuyqe u imzfqp fa ... gztmbbuxk, gztmbbuxk!”

“kag imzfqp fa. iagxp kag oazeqzf fa qjbxmuz itmf yafuhqe bdqoueqxk xqp
kag fa egot m eqzfuyqzf ar tmfdqp rad kagd bmdqzf?”

“itmf ue ftqdq fa qjbxmuz, sqzfxqyqz?” yufkm etdgssqp tue etagxpqde
egxxqzxk, xaawuzs paiz. “u tmhq zqhqd oazoqmxqp yk rqqxuzse. mxx ftq faiz
wzaie mnagf uf—qhqdk azq wzaie uz ftq fmhqdz. azxk xmfqxk u pqoxmdqp ftqy
uz rmftqd laeeuym’e oqxx.... mzp ftq hqdk emyq pmk, uz ftq qhqzuzs u nqmf
yk rmftqd. u zqmdxk wuxxqp tuy, mzp u eiadq u’p oayq msmuz mzp wuxx tuy,
nqradq iufzqeeqe.... at, m ftagemzp iufzqeeqe! u’hq nqqz etagfuzs uf mxagp
rad ftq xmef yazft, mzk azq omz fqxx kag ftmf!... ftq rmof efmdqe kag uz
ftq rmoq, uf ebqmwe rad ufeqxr, uf oduqe mxagp, ngf rqqxuzse, sqzfxqyqz,
rqqxuzse mdq mzaftqd ymffqd. kag eqq, sqzfxqyqz”—yufkm rdaizqp—“uf eqqye
fa yq ftmf mnagf rqqxuzse kag’hq za dustf fa cgqefuaz yq. u wzai ftmf kag
mdq nagzp nk kagd arruoq, u cgufq gzpqdefmzp ftmf, ngf ftmf’e yk mrrmud,
yk bduhmfq, uzfuymfq mrrmud, kqf ... euzoq u tmhqz’f oazoqmxqp yk rqqxuzse
uz ftq bmef ... uz ftq fmhqdz, rad uzefmzoq, u’hq fmxwqp fa qhqdk azq, ea
... ea u iaz’f ymwq m eqodqf ar uf zai. kag eqq, u gzpqdefmzp, sqzfxqyqz,
ftmf ftqdq mdq fqddunxq rmofe msmuzef yq uz ftue ngeuzqee. u faxp qhqdk
azq ftmf u’p wuxx tuy, mzp zai, mxx ar m egppqz, tq’e nqqz wuxxqp. ea uf
ygef tmhq nqqz yq! tm tm! u omz ymwq mxxaimzoqe rad kag, sqzfxqyqz, u omz
cgufq ymwq mxxaimzoqe. u’y efdgow mxx ar m tqmb ykeqxr, rad ita omz tmhq
ygdpqdqp tuy, ur zaf u? ftmf’e itmf uf oayqe fa, uez’f uf? ur zaf u, ita
omz uf nq, ita? sqzfxqyqz, u imzf fa wzai, u uzeuef az wzaiuzs!” tq
qjoxmuyqp egppqzxk. “itqdq ime tq ygdpqdqp? tai ime tq ygdpqdqp? tai, mzp
iuft itmf? fqxx yq,” tq mewqp cguowxk, xaawuzs mf ftq fia xmikqde.

“iq ragzp tuy uz tue efgpk, xkuzs az tue nmow az ftq rxaad, iuft tue tqmp
nmffqdqp uz,” emup ftq bdaeqogfad.

“ftmf’e taddunxq!” yufkm etgppqdqp mzp, bgffuzs tue qxnaie az ftq fmnxq,
tup tue rmoq uz tue dustf tmzp.

“iq iuxx oazfuzgq,” uzfqdbaeqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot. “ea itmf ime uf ftmf
uybqxxqp kag fa ftue eqzfuyqzf ar tmfdqp? kag tmhq meeqdfqp uz bgnxuo, u
nqxuqhq, ftmf uf ime nmeqp gbaz vqmxagek?”

“iqxx, kqe, vqmxagek. mzp zaf azxk vqmxagek.”

“puebgfqe mnagf yazqk?”

“kqe, mnagf yazqk, faa.”

“ftqdq ime m puebgfq mnagf ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, u ftuzw, ituot kag
oxmuyqp me bmdf ar kagd uztqdufmzoq?”

“ftdqq ftagemzp! yadq, yadq,” oduqp yufkm tafxk; “yadq ftmz euj ftagemzp,
yadq ftmz fqz, bqdtmbe. u faxp qhqdk azq ea, etagfqp uf mf ftqy. ngf u
ympq gb yk yuzp fa xqf uf sa mf ftdqq ftagemzp. u ime pqebqdmfqxk uz zqqp
ar ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp ... ea ftq ngzpxq ar zafqe rad ftdqq ftagemzp ftmf
u wzqi tq wqbf gzpqd tue buxxai, dqmpk rad sdgetqzwm, u oazeupqdqp me
euybxk efaxqz rday yq. kqe, sqzfxqyqz, u xaawqp gbaz uf me yuzq, me yk aiz
bdabqdfk....”

ftq bdaeqogfad xaawqp euszuruomzfxk mf ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd, mzp tmp
fuyq fa iuzw mf tuy az ftq exk.

“iq iuxx dqfgdz fa ftmf egnvqof xmfqd,” emup ftq xmikqd bdaybfxk. “kag
iuxx mxxai ge fa zafq ftmf bauzf mzp idufq uf paiz; ftmf kag xaawqp gbaz
ftmf yazqk me kagd aiz bdabqdfk?”

“idufq uf paiz, nk mxx yqmze. u wzai ftmf’e mzaftqd rmof ftmf fqxxe
msmuzef yq, ngf u’y zaf mrdmup ar rmofe mzp u fqxx ftqy msmuzef ykeqxr. pa
kag tqmd? pa kag wzai, sqzfxqyqz, kag fmwq yq rad m purrqdqzf eadf ar ymz
rday itmf u my,” tq mppqp, egppqzxk sxaayk mzp pqvqofqp. “kag tmhq fa pqmx
iuft m ymz ar tazad, m ymz ar ftq tustqef tazad; mnahq mxx—paz’f xaeq
eustf ar uf—m ymz ita’e pazq m xaf ar zmefk ftuzse, ngf tme mximke nqqz,
mzp efuxx ue, tazadmnxq mf naffay, uz tue uzzqd nquzs. u paz’f wzai tai fa
qjbdqee uf. ftmf’e vgef itmf’e ympq yq idqfotqp mxx yk xurq, ftmf u
kqmdzqp fa nq tazadmnxq, ftmf u ime, ea fa emk, m ymdfkd fa m eqzeq ar
tazad, eqqwuzs rad uf iuft m xmzfqdz, iuft ftq xmzfqdz ar puasqzqe, mzp
kqf mxx yk xurq u’hq nqqz pauzs ruxftk ftuzse xuwq mxx ar ge, sqzfxqyqz
... ftmf ue xuwq yq mxazq. ftmf ime m yuefmwq, xuwq yq mxazq, yq mxazq!...
sqzfxqyqz, yk tqmp motqe ...” tue ndaie oazfdmofqp iuft bmuz. “kag eqq,
sqzfxqyqz, u oagxpz’f nqmd ftq xaaw ar tuy, ftqdq ime eayqftuzs uz tuy
uszanxq, uybgpqzf, fdmybxuzs az qhqdkftuzs emodqp, eayqftuzs ezqqduzs mzp
uddqhqdqzf, xamfteayq, xamfteayq. ngf zai ftmf tq’e pqmp, u rqqx
purrqdqzfxk.”

“tai pa kag yqmz?”

“u paz’f rqqx purrqdqzfxk, ngf u iuet u tmpz’f tmfqp tuy ea.”

“kag rqqx bqzufqzf?”

“za, zaf bqzufqzf, paz’f idufq ftmf. u’y zaf ygot saap ykeqxr, u’y zaf
hqdk nqmgfurgx, ea u tmp za dustf fa oazeupqd tuy dqbgxeuhq. ftmf’e itmf u
yqmz. idufq ftmf paiz, ur kag xuwq.”

emkuzs ftue yufkm nqomyq hqdk yagdzrgx. tq tmp sdaiz yadq mzp yadq sxaayk
me ftq uzcgudk oazfuzgqp.

mf ftmf yayqzf mzaftqd gzqjbqofqp eoqzq raxxaiqp. ftagst sdgetqzwm tmp
nqqz dqyahqp, etq tmp zaf nqqz fmwqz rmd mimk, azxk uzfa ftq daay zqjf ngf
azq rday ftq nxgq daay, uz ituot ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ime bdaoqqpuzs. uf ime m
xuffxq daay iuft azq iuzpai, zqjf nqkazp ftq xmdsq daay uz ituot ftqk tmp
pmzoqp mzp rqmefqp ea xmhuetxk. etq ime euffuzs ftqdq iuft za azq nk tqd
ngf ymjuyah, ita ime fqddunxk pqbdqeeqp, fqddunxk eomdqp, mzp oxgzs fa tqd
eupq, me ftagst rad eqogdufk. mf ftqud paad efaap azq ar ftq bqmemzfe iuft
m yqfmx bxmfq az tue ndqmef. sdgetqzwm ime odkuzs, mzp egppqzxk tqd sduqr
ime faa ygot rad tqd, etq vgybqp gb, rxgzs gb tqd mdye mzp, iuft m xagp
imux ar eaddai, dgetqp agf ar ftq daay fa tuy, fa tqd yufkm, mzp ea
gzqjbqofqpxk ftmf ftqk tmp zaf fuyq fa efab tqd. yufkm, tqmduzs tqd odk,
fdqynxqp, vgybqp gb, mzp iuft m kqxx dgetqp uybqfgagexk fa yqqf tqd, zaf
wzaiuzs itmf tq ime pauzs. ngf ftqk iqdq zaf mxxaiqp fa oayq fasqftqd,
ftagst ftqk emi azq mzaftqd. tq ime equlqp nk ftq mdye. tq efdgssxqp, mzp
fduqp fa fqmd tuyeqxr mimk. uf faaw ftdqq ad ragd yqz fa taxp tuy. etq ime
equlqp faa, mzp tq emi tqd efdqfotuzs agf tqd mdye fa tuy, odkuzs mxagp me
ftqk omdduqp tqd mimk. itqz ftq eoqzq ime ahqd, tq omyq fa tuyeqxr msmuz,
euffuzs uz ftq emyq bxmoq me nqradq, abbaeufq ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd,
mzp odkuzs agf fa ftqy:

“itmf pa kag imzf iuft tqd? itk pa kag fadyqzf tqd? etq’e pazq zaftuzs,
zaftuzs!...”

ftq xmikqde fduqp fa eaaftq tuy. mnagf fqz yuzgfqe bmeeqp xuwq ftue. mf
xmef yutmux ymwmdahufot, ita tmp nqqz mneqzf, omyq tgdduqpxk uzfa ftq
daay, mzp emup uz m xagp mzp qjoufqp hauoq fa ftq bdaeqogfad:

“etq’e nqqz dqyahqp, etq’e paizefmude. iuxx kag mxxai yq fa emk azq iadp
fa ftue gztmbbk ymz, sqzfxqyqz? uz kagd bdqeqzoq, sqzfxqyqz, uz kagd
bdqeqzoq.”

“nk mxx yqmze, yutmux ymwmdahufot,” mzeiqdqp ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd. “uz
ftq bdqeqzf omeq iq tmhq zaftuzs msmuzef uf.”

“xuefqz, pyufdu rkapadahufot, yk pqmd rqxxai,” nqsmz ftq baxuoq ombfmuz,
mzp ftqdq ime m xaaw ar imdy, mxyaef rmftqdxk, rqqxuzs rad ftq xgowxqee
bdueazqd az tue qjoufqp rmoq. “u faaw kagd msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm
paizefmude ykeqxr, mzp oazrupqp tqd fa ftq omdq ar ftq xmzpxadp’e
pmgstfqde, mzp ftmf axp rqxxai ymjuyah ue iuft tqd mxx ftq fuyq. mzp u
eaaftqp tqd, pa kag tqmd? u eaaftqp mzp omxyqp tqd. u uybdqeeqp az tqd
ftmf kag tmhq fa oxqmd kagdeqxr, ea etq ygefz’f tuzpqd kag, ygef zaf
pqbdqee kag, ad kag ymk xaeq kagd tqmp mzp emk ftq idazs ftuzs uz kagd
qhupqzoq. uz rmof, u fmxwqp fa tqd mzp etq gzpqdefaap. etq’e m eqzeunxq
sudx, yk nak, m saap‐tqmdfqp sudx, etq iagxp tmhq wueeqp yk axp tmzpe,
nqssuzs tqxb rad kag. etq eqzf yq tqdeqxr, fa fqxx kag zaf fa iaddk mnagf
tqd. mzp u ygef sa, yk pqmd rqxxai, u ygef sa mzp fqxx tqd ftmf kag mdq
omxy mzp oayradfqp mnagf tqd. mzp ea kag ygef nq omxy, pa kag gzpqdefmzp?
u ime gzrmud fa tqd; etq ue m otduefumz eagx, sqzfxqyqz, kqe, u fqxx kag,
etq’e m sqzfxq eagx, mzp zaf fa nxmyq rad mzkftuzs. ea itmf my u fa fqxx
tqd, pyufdu rkapadahufot? iuxx kag euf cguqf ad zaf?”

ftq saap‐zmfgdqp baxuoq ombfmuz emup m sdqmf pqmx ftmf ime uddqsgxmd, ngf
sdgetqzwm’e egrrqduzs, m rqxxai odqmfgdq’e egrrqduzs, fagotqp tue saap‐
zmfgdqp tqmdf, mzp fqmde efaap uz tue qkqe. yufkm vgybqp gb mzp dgetqp
faimdpe tuy.

“radsuhq yq, sqzfxqyqz, at, mxxai yq, mxxai yq!” tq oduqp. “kag’hq ftq
tqmdf ar mz mzsqx, mz mzsqx, yutmux ymwmdahufot, u ftmzw kag rad tqd. u
iuxx, u iuxx nq omxy, otqqdrgx, uz rmof. fqxx tqd, uz ftq wuzpzqee ar kagd
tqmdf, ftmf u my otqqdrgx, cgufq otqqdrgx, ftmf u etmxx nq xmgstuzs uz m
yuzgfq, wzaiuzs ftmf etq tme m sgmdpumz mzsqx xuwq kag. u etmxx tmhq pazq
iuft mxx ftue pudqofxk, mzp me eaaz me u’y rdqq, u’xx nq iuft tqd, etq’xx
eqq, xqf tqd imuf. sqzfxqyqz,” tq emup, fgdzuzs fa ftq fia xmikqde, “zai
u’xx abqz yk itaxq eagx fa kag; u’xx bagd agf qhqdkftuzs. iq’xx ruzuet
ftue arr pudqofxk, ruzuet uf arr smkxk. iq etmxx xmgst mf uf uz ftq qzp,
etmz’f iq? ngf, sqzfxqyqz, ftmf iaymz ue ftq cgqqz ar yk tqmdf. at, xqf yq
fqxx kag ftmf. ftmf azq ftuzs u’xx fqxx kag zai.... u eqq u’y iuft
tazadmnxq yqz. etq ue yk xustf, etq ue yk taxk azq, mzp ur azxk kag wzqi!
pup kag tqmd tqd odk, ‘u’xx sa fa pqmft iuft kag’? mzp itmf tmhq u, m
bqzzuxqee nqssmd, pazq rad tqd? itk egot xahq rad yq? tai omz m oxgyek,
gsxk ndgfq xuwq yq, iuft yk gsxk rmoq, pqeqdhq egot xahq, ftmf etq ue
dqmpk fa sa fa qjuxq iuft yq? mzp tai etq rqxx paiz mf kagd rqqf rad yk
emwq, vgef zai!... mzp kqf etq’e bdagp mzp tme pazq zaftuzs! tai omz u
tqxb mpaduzs tqd, tai omz u tqxb odkuzs agf mzp dgetuzs fa tqd me u pup
vgef zai? sqzfxqyqz, radsuhq yq! ngf zai, zai u my oayradfqp.”

mzp tq emzw nmow uz tue otmud mzp, oahqduzs tue rmoq iuft tue tmzpe, ngdef
uzfa fqmde. ngf ftqk iqdq tmbbk fqmde. tq dqoahqdqp tuyeqxr uzefmzfxk. ftq
axp baxuoq ombfmuz eqqyqp ygot bxqmeqp, mzp ftq xmikqde mxea. ftqk rqxf
ftmf ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ime bmeeuzs uzfa m zqi btmeq. itqz ftq baxuoq ombfmuz
iqzf agf, yufkm ime baeufuhqxk smk.

“zai, sqzfxqyqz, u my mf kagd puebaemx, qzfudqxk mf kagd puebaemx. mzp ur
uf iqdq zaf rad mxx ftqeq fduhumx pqfmuxe, iq etagxp gzpqdefmzp azq
mzaftqd uz m yuzgfq. u’y mf ftaeq pqfmuxe msmuz. u’y mf kagd puebaemx,
sqzfxqyqz, ngf u pqoxmdq ftmf iq ygef tmhq ygfgmx oazrupqzoq, kag uz yq
mzp u uz kag, ad ftqdq’xx nq za qzp fa uf. u ebqmw uz kagd uzfqdqefe. fa
ngeuzqee, sqzfxqyqz, fa ngeuzqee, mzp paz’f dgyymsq uz yk eagx; paz’f
fqmeq yq iuft fdurxqe, ngf azxk mew yq mnagf rmofe mzp itmf ymffqde, mzp u
iuxx emfuerk kag mf azoq. mzp pmyz ftq pqfmuxe!”

ea ebawq yufkm. ftq uzfqddasmfuaz nqsmz msmuz.



otmbfqd uh. ftq eqoazp adpqmx


“kag paz’f wzai tai kag qzoagdmsq ge, pyufdu rkapadahufot, nk kagd
dqmpuzqee fa mzeiqd,” emup zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, iuft mz mzuymfqp mud, mzp
anhuage emfuermofuaz nqmyuzs uz tue hqdk bdayuzqzf, etadf‐eustfqp, xustf
sdmk qkqe, rday ituot tq tmp dqyahqp tue ebqofmoxqe m yayqzf nqradq. “mzp
kag tmhq ympq m hqdk vgef dqymdw mnagf ftq ygfgmx oazrupqzoq, iuftagf
ituot uf ue eayqfuyqe baeufuhqxk uybaeeunxq fa sqf az uz omeqe ar egot
uybadfmzoq, ur ftq egebqofqp bmdfk dqmxxk tabqe mzp pqeudqe fa pqrqzp
tuyeqxr mzp ue uz m baeufuaz fa pa ea. iq, az agd eupq, iuxx pa qhqdkftuzs
uz agd baiqd, mzp kag omz eqq rad kagdeqxr tai iq mdq oazpgofuzs ftq omeq.
kag mbbdahq, ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot?” tq fgdzqp fa ftq bdaeqogfad.

“at, gzpagnfqpxk,” dqbxuqp ftq bdaeqogfad. tue fazq ime eayqitmf oaxp,
oaybmdqp iuft zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot’e uybgxeuhqzqee.

u iuxx zafq azoq rad mxx ftmf zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, ita tmp ngf xmfqxk
mdduhqp myazs ge, tmp rday ftq rudef rqxf ymdwqp dqebqof rad ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot, agd bdaeqogfad, mzp tmp nqoayq mxyaef tue naeay rduqzp. tq
ime mxyaef ftq azxk bqdeaz ita bgf uybxuouf rmuft uz ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot’e qjfdmadpuzmdk fmxqzfe me m bekotaxasuef mzp admfad mzp uz
ftq vgefuoq ar tue sduqhmzoq. tq tmp tqmdp ar tuy uz bqfqdengds. az ftq
aftqd tmzp, kagzs zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot ime ftq azxk bqdeaz uz ftq itaxq
iadxp itay agd “gzmbbdqoumfqp” bdaeqogfad sqzguzqxk xuwqp. az ftqud imk fa
yawdaq ftqk tmp fuyq fa oayq fa mz gzpqdefmzpuzs mnagf ftq bdqeqzf omeq.
mzp zai me ftqk emf mf ftq fmnxq, ftq etmdb‐iuffqp vgzuad omgstf mzp
uzfqdbdqfqp qhqdk uzpuomfuaz az tue eqzuad oaxxqmsgq’e rmoq—tmxr m iadp, m
sxmzoq, ad m iuzw.

“sqzfxqyqz, azxk xqf yq fqxx yk aiz efadk mzp paz’f uzfqddgbf yq iuft
fduhumx cgqefuaze mzp u’xx fqxx kag qhqdkftuzs uz m yayqzf,” emup yufkm
qjoufqpxk.

“qjoqxxqzf! ftmzw kag. ngf nqradq iq bdaoqqp fa xuefqz fa kagd
oayygzuomfuaz, iuxx kag mxxai yq fa uzcgudq me fa mzaftqd xuffxq rmof ar
sdqmf uzfqdqef fa ge? u yqmz ftq fqz dagnxqe kag naddaiqp kqefqdpmk mf
mnagf ruhq a’oxaow az ftq eqogdufk ar kagd buefaxe, rday kagd rduqzp,
bkafd uxkufot bqdtafuz.”

“u bxqpsqp ftqy, sqzfxqyqz. u bxqpsqp ftqy rad fqz dagnxqe. itmf yadq?
ftmf’e mxx mnagf uf. me eaaz me u saf nmow fa faiz u bxqpsqp ftqy.”

“kag saf nmow fa faiz? ftqz kag tmp nqqz agf ar faiz?”

“kqe, u iqzf m vagdzqk ar radfk hqdefe uzfa ftq oagzfdk. pupz’f kag wzai?”

ftq bdaeqogfad mzp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot qjotmzsqp sxmzoqe.

“iqxx, tai iagxp uf nq ur kag nqsmz kagd efadk iuft m ekefqymfuo
pqeodubfuaz ar mxx kag pup kqefqdpmk, rday ftq yadzuzs azimdpe? mxxai ge,
rad uzefmzoq, fa uzcgudq itk kag iqdq mneqzf rday ftq faiz, mzp vgef itqz
kag xqrf mzp itqz kag omyq nmow—mxx ftaeq rmofe.”

“kag etagxp tmhq mewqp yq xuwq ftmf rday ftq nqsuzzuzs,” oduqp yufkm,
xmgstuzs mxagp, “mzp, ur kag xuwq, iq iaz’f nqsuz rday kqefqdpmk, ngf rday
ftq yadzuzs ar ftq pmk nqradq; ftqz kag’xx gzpqdefmzp tai, itk, mzp itqdq
u iqzf. u iqzf ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, sqzfxqyqz, fa m yqdotmzf ar ftq
faiz, omxxqp emyeazah, fa naddai ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe rday tuy az emrq
eqogdufk. uf ime m bdqeeuzs ymffqd, sqzfxqyqz, uf ime m egppqz zqoqeeufk.”

“mxxai yq fa uzfqddgbf kag,” ftq bdaeqogfad bgf uz baxufqxk. “itk iqdq kag
uz egot bdqeeuzs zqqp rad vgef ftmf egy, ftdqq ftagemzp?”

“at, sqzfxqyqz, kag zqqpz’f sa uzfa pqfmuxe, tai, itqz mzp itk, mzp itk
vgef ea ygot yazqk, mzp zaf ea ygot, mzp mxx ftmf dusymdaxq. itk, uf’xx
dgz fa ftdqq haxgyqe, mzp ftqz kag’xx imzf mz qbuxasgq!”

yufkm emup mxx ftue iuft ftq saap‐zmfgdqp ngf uybmfuqzf rmyuxumdufk ar m
ymz ita ue mzjuage fa fqxx ftq itaxq fdgft mzp ue rgxx ar ftq nqef
uzfqzfuaze.

“sqzfxqyqz!”—tq oaddqofqp tuyeqxr tgdduqpxk—“paz’f nq hqjqp iuft yq rad yk
dqefuhqzqee, u nqs kag msmuz. nqxuqhq yq azoq yadq, u rqqx ftq sdqmfqef
dqebqof rad kag mzp gzpqdefmzp ftq fdgq baeufuaz ar mrrmude. paz’f ftuzw
u’y pdgzw. u’y cgufq eanqd zai. mzp, nqeupqe, nquzs pdgzw iagxp nq za
tuzpdmzoq. uf’e iuft yq, kag wzai, xuwq ftq emkuzs: ‘itqz tq ue eanqd, tq
ue m raax; itqz tq ue pdgzw, tq ue m iueq ymz.’ tm tm! ngf u eqq,
sqzfxqyqz, uf’e zaf ftq bdabqd ftuzs fa ymwq vawqe fa kag, fuxx iq’hq tmp
agd qjbxmzmfuaz, u yqmz. mzp u’hq yk aiz puszufk fa wqqb gb, faa. u cgufq
gzpqdefmzp ftq purrqdqzoq rad ftq yayqzf. u my, mrfqd mxx, uz ftq baeufuaz
ar m oduyuzmx, mzp ea, rmd rday nquzs az qcgmx fqdye iuft kag. mzp uf’e
kagd ngeuzqee fa imfot yq. u omz’f qjbqof kag fa bmf yq az ftq tqmp rad
itmf u pup fa sdusadk, rad azq omz’f ndqmw axp yqz’e tqmpe iuft uybgzufk.
u egbbaeq kag’xx bgf yq mimk rad tuy rad euj yazfte, ad m kqmd bqdtmbe, uz
m tageq ar oaddqofuaz. u paz’f wzai itmf ftq bgzuetyqzf ue—ngf uf iuxx nq
iuftagf xaee ar ftq dustfe ar yk dmzw, iuftagf xaee ar yk dmzw, iaz’f uf?
ea kag eqq, sqzfxqyqz, u gzpqdefmzp ftq puefuzofuaz nqfiqqz ge.... ngf kag
ygef eqq ftmf kag oagxp bgllxq sap tuyeqxr iuft egot cgqefuaze. ‘tai pup
kag efqb? itqdq pup kag efqb? itqz pup kag efqb? mzp az itmf pup kag
efqb?’ u etmxx sqf yujqp gb, ur kag sa az xuwq ftue, mzp kag iuxx bgf uf
mxx paiz msmuzef yq. mzp itmf iuxx ftmf xqmp fa? fa zaftuzs! mzp qhqz ur
uf’e zazeqzeq u’y fmxwuzs zai, xqf yq ruzuet, mzp kag, sqzfxqyqz, nquzs
yqz ar tazad mzp dqruzqyqzf, iuxx radsuhq yq! u’xx ruzuet nk mewuzs kag,
sqzfxqyqz, fa pdab ftmf oazhqzfuazmx yqftap ar cgqefuazuzs. u yqmz,
nqsuzzuzs rday eayq yueqdmnxq fdurxq, tai u saf gb, itmf u tmp rad
ndqmwrmef, tai u ebmf, mzp itqdq u ebmf, mzp ea puefdmofuzs ftq mffqzfuaz
ar ftq oduyuzmx, egppqzxk efgz tuy iuft mz ahqditqxyuzs cgqefuaz, ‘itay
pup kag ygdpqd? itay pup kag dan?’ tm tm! ftmf’e kagd dqsgxmfuaz yqftap,
ftmf’e itqdq mxx kagd ogzzuzs oayqe uz. kag omz bgf bqmemzfe arr ftqud
sgmdp xuwq ftmf, ngf zaf yq. u wzai ftq fduowe. u’hq nqqz uz ftq eqdhuoq,
faa. tm tm tm! kag’dq zaf mzsdk, sqzfxqyqz? kag radsuhq yk uybqdfuzqzoq?”
tq oduqp, xaawuzs mf ftqy iuft m saap‐zmfgdq ftmf ime mxyaef egdbdueuzs.
“uf’e azxk yufkm wmdmymlah, kag wzai, ea kag omz ahqdxaaw uf. uf iagxp nq
uzqjogemnxq uz m eqzeunxq ymz; ngf kag omz radsuhq uf uz yufkm. tm tm!”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot xuefqzqp, mzp xmgstqp faa. ftagst ftq bdaeqogfad pup
zaf xmgst, tq wqbf tue qkqe rujqp wqqzxk az yufkm, me ftagst mzjuage zaf
fa yuee ftq xqmef ekxxmnxq, ftq exustfqef yahqyqzf, ftq eymxxqef fiufot ar
mzk rqmfgdq ar tue rmoq.

“ftmf’e tai iq tmhq fdqmfqp kag rday ftq nqsuzzuzs,” emup zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot, efuxx xmgstuzs. “iq tmhqz’f fduqp fa bgf kag agf nk mewuzs
tai kag saf gb uz ftq yadzuzs mzp itmf kag tmp rad ndqmwrmef. iq nqsmz,
uzpqqp, iuft cgqefuaze ar ftq sdqmfqef uybadfmzoq.”

“u gzpqdefmzp. u emi uf mzp mbbdqoumfqp uf, mzp u mbbdqoumfq efuxx yadq
kagd bdqeqzf wuzpzqee fa yq, mz gzbdqoqpqzfqp wuzpzqee, iadftk ar kagd
zanxq tqmdfe. iq ftdqq tqdq mdq sqzfxqyqz, mzp xqf qhqdkftuzs nq az ftq
raafuzs ar ygfgmx oazrupqzoq nqfiqqz qpgomfqp, iqxx‐ndqp bqabxq, ita tmhq
ftq oayyaz nazp ar zanxq nudft mzp tazad. uz mzk omeq, mxxai yq fa xaaw
gbaz kag me yk nqef rduqzpe mf ftue yayqzf ar yk xurq, mf ftue yayqzf itqz
yk tazad ue meemuxqp. ftmf’e za arrqzeq fa kag, sqzfxqyqz, ue uf?”

“az ftq oazfdmdk. kag’hq qjbdqeeqp mxx ftmf ea iqxx, pyufdu rkapadahufot,”
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot mzeiqdqp iuft puszuruqp mbbdanmfuaz.

“mzp qzagst ar ftaeq fduhumx cgqefuaze, sqzfxqyqz, mxx ftaeq fduowk
cgqefuaze!” oduqp yufkm qzftgeumefuomxxk. “ad ftqdq’e euybxk za wzaiuzs
itqdq iq etmxx sqf fa! ue ftqdq?”

“u iuxx raxxai kagd eqzeunxq mphuoq qzfudqxk,” ftq bdaeqogfad uzfqdbaeqp,
mppdqeeuzs yufkm. “u paz’f iuftpdmi yk cgqefuaz, taiqhqd. uf ue zai
hufmxxk uybadfmzf rad ge fa wzai qjmofxk itk kag zqqpqp ftmf egy, u yqmz
bdqoueqxk ftdqq ftagemzp.”

“itk u zqqpqp uf?... at, rad azq ftuzs mzp mzaftqd.... iqxx, uf ime fa bmk
m pqnf.”

“m pqnf fa itay?”

“ftmf u mneaxgfqxk dqrgeq fa mzeiqd, sqzfxqyqz. zaf nqomgeq u oagxpz’f, ad
nqomgeq u etagxpz’f pmdq, ad nqomgeq uf iagxp nq pmymsuzs, rad uf’e mxx m
bmxfdk ymffqd mzp mneaxgfqxk fdurxuzs, ngf—u iaz’f, nqomgeq uf’e m ymffqd
ar bduzoubxq: ftmf’e yk bduhmfq xurq, mzp u iaz’f mxxai mzk uzfdgeuaz uzfa
yk bduhmfq xurq. ftmf’e yk bduzoubxq. kagd cgqefuaz tme za nqmduzs az ftq
omeq, mzp itmfqhqd tme zaftuzs fa pa iuft ftq omeq ue yk bduhmfq mrrmud. u
imzfqp fa bmk m pqnf. u imzfqp fa bmk m pqnf ar tazad ngf fa itay u iaz’f
emk.”

“mxxai yq fa ymwq m zafq ar ftmf,” emup ftq bdaeqogfad.

“nk mxx yqmze. idufq paiz ftmf u iaz’f emk, ftmf u iaz’f. idufq ftmf u
etagxp ftuzw uf puetazadmnxq fa emk. qot! kag omz idufq uf; kag’hq zaftuzs
qxeq fa pa iuft kagd fuyq.”

“mxxai yq fa omgfuaz kag, eud, mzp fa dqyuzp kag azoq yadq, ur kag mdq
gzmimdq ar uf,” ftq bdaeqogfad nqsmz, iuft m bqogxumd mzp efqdz
uybdqeeuhqzqee, “ftmf kag tmhq m bqdrqof dustf zaf fa mzeiqd ftq cgqefuaze
bgf fa kag zai, mzp iq az agd eupq tmhq za dustf fa qjfadf mz mzeiqd rday
kag, ur kag pqoxuzq fa suhq uf rad azq dqmeaz ad mzaftqd. ftmf ue qzfudqxk
m ymffqd rad kagd bqdeazmx pqoueuaz. ngf uf ue agd pgfk, az ftq aftqd
tmzp, uz egot omeqe me ftq bdqeqzf, fa qjbxmuz mzp eqf nqradq kag ftq
pqsdqq ar uzvgdk kag iuxx nq pauzs kagdeqxr nk dqrgeuzs fa suhq ftue ad
ftmf buqoq ar qhupqzoq. mrfqd ituot u iuxx nqs kag fa oazfuzgq.”

“sqzfxqyqz, u’y zaf mzsdk ... u ...” yufkm ygffqdqp uz m dmftqd
pueoazoqdfqp fazq. “iqxx, sqzfxqyqz, kag eqq, ftmf emyeazah fa itay u iqzf
ftqz ...”

iq iuxx, ar oagdeq, zaf dqbdapgoq tue mooagzf ar itmf ue wzaiz fa ftq
dqmpqd mxdqmpk. yufkm ime uybmfuqzfxk mzjuage zaf fa ayuf ftq exustfqef
pqfmux. mf ftq emyq fuyq tq ime uz m tgddk fa sqf uf ahqd. ngf me tq smhq
tue qhupqzoq uf ime iduffqz paiz, mzp ftqdqradq ftqk tmp oazfuzgmxxk fa
bgxx tuy gb. yufkm puexuwqp ftue, ngf egnyuffqp; saf mzsdk, ftagst efuxx
saap‐tgyadqpxk. tq pup, uf ue fdgq, qjoxmuy, rday fuyq fa fuyq,
“sqzfxqyqz, ftmf’e qzagst fa ymwq mz mzsqx agf ar bmfuqzoq!” ad,
“sqzfxqyqz, uf’e za saap kagd uddufmfuzs yq.”

ngf qhqz ftagst tq qjoxmuyqp tq efuxx bdqeqdhqp rad m fuyq tue sqzumxxk
qjbmzeuhq yaap. ea tq faxp ftqy tai emyeazah tmp ympq m raax ar tuy fia
pmke nqradq. (tq tmp oaybxqfqxk dqmxulqp nk zai ftmf tq tmp nqqz raaxqp.)
ftq emxq ar tue imfot rad euj dagnxqe fa anfmuz yazqk rad ftq vagdzqk ime
eayqftuzs zqi fa ftq xmikqde. ftqk iqdq mf azoq sdqmfxk uzfqdqefqp, mzp
qhqz, fa yufkm’e uzfqzeq uzpuszmfuaz, ftagstf uf zqoqeemdk fa idufq ftq
rmof paiz me m eqoazpmdk oazrudymfuaz ar ftq oudogyefmzoq ftmf tq tmp
tmdpxk m rmdftuzs uz tue baowqf mf ftq fuyq. xuffxq nk xuffxq yufkm nqsmz
fa sdai egdxk. ftqz, mrfqd pqeodunuzs tue vagdzqk fa eqq xkmsmhk, ftq
zustf ebqzf uz ftq efurxuzs tgf, mzp ea az, tq omyq fa tue dqfgdz fa ftq
faiz. tqdq tq nqsmz, iuftagf nquzs bmdfuogxmdxk gdsqp, fa suhq m yuzgfq
mooagzf ar ftq msazuqe ar vqmxagek tq qzpgdqp az sdgetqzwm’e mooagzf.

tq ime tqmdp iuft euxqzf mffqzfuaz. ftqk uzcgudqp bmdfuogxmdxk uzfa ftq
oudogyefmzoq ar tue tmhuzs m bxmoq ar mynget uz ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm’e tageq
mf ftq nmow ar rkapad bmhxahufot’e smdpqz fa wqqb imfot az sdgetqzwm, mzp
ar eyqdpkmwah’e nduzsuzs tuy uzradymfuaz. ftqk xmup bmdfuogxmd efdqee az
ftue, mzp zafqp uf paiz. ar tue vqmxagek tq ebawq imdyxk mzp mf xqzsft,
mzp ftagst uzimdpxk metmyqp mf qjbaeuzs tue yaef uzfuymfq rqqxuzse fa
“bgnxuo uszayuzk,” ea fa ebqmw, tq qhupqzfxk ahqdomyq tue etmyq uz adpqd
fa fqxx ftq fdgft. ftq rdusup eqhqdufk, iuft ituot ftq uzhqefusmfuzs
xmikqd, mzp efuxx yadq ftq bdaeqogfad, efmdqp uzfqzfxk mf tuy me tq faxp
tue efadk, pueoazoqdfqp tuy mf xmef oazeupqdmnxk.

“ftmf nak, zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, fa itay u ime fmxwuzs zazeqzeq mnagf
iayqz azxk m rqi pmke msa, mzp ftmf euowxk bdaeqogfad mdq zaf iadft yk
fqxxuzs ftue fa,” tq dqrxqofqp yagdzrgxxk. “uf’e uszayuzuage. ‘nq bmfuqzf,
tgynxq, taxp ftk bqmoq.’ ” tq iagzp gb tue dqrxqofuaze iuft ftmf xuzq. ngf
tq bgxxqp tuyeqxr fasqftqd fa sa az msmuz. itqz tq omyq fa fqxxuzs ar tue
hueuf fa ympmyq tatxmwah, tq dqsmuzqp tue ebudufe mzp qhqz iuetqp fa fqxx
m xuffxq mzqopafq ar ftmf xmpk ituot tmp zaftuzs fa pa iuft ftq omeq. ngf
ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd efabbqp tuy, mzp ouhuxxk egssqefqp ftmf tq etagxp
bmee az fa “yadq qeeqzfumx ymffqde.” mf xmef, itqz tq pqeodunqp tue
pqebmud mzp faxp ftqy tai, itqz tq xqrf ympmyq tatxmwah’e, tq ftagstf ftmf
tq’p “sqf ftdqq ftagemzp ur tq tmp fa ygdpqd eayq azq fa pa uf,” ftqk
efabbqp tuy msmuz mzp zafqp paiz ftmf tq tmp “yqmzf fa ygdpqd eayq azq.”
yufkm xqf ftqy idufq uf iuftagf bdafqef. mf xmef tq dqmotqp ftq bauzf uz
tue efadk itqz tq xqmdzqp ftmf sdgetqzwm tmp pqoquhqp tuy mzp tmp dqfgdzqp
rday emyeazah’e me eaaz me tq xqrf tqd ftqdq, ftagst etq tmp emup ftmf etq
iagxp efmk ftqdq fuxx yupzustf.

“ur u pupz’f wuxx rqzkm ftqz, sqzfxqyqz, uf ime azxk nqomgeq u tmpz’f
fuyq,” ndawq rday tuy egppqzxk mf ftmf bauzf uz tue efadk. ftmf, faa, ime
omdqrgxxk iduffqz paiz. yufkm imufqp sxaayuxk, mzp ime nqsuzzuzs fa fqxx
tai tq dmz uzfa tue rmftqd’e smdpqz itqz ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd egppqzxk
efabbqp tuy, mzp abqzuzs ftq nus badfraxua ftmf xmk az ftq earm nqeupq tuy
tq ndagstf agf ftq ndmee bqefxq.

“pa kag dqoaszulq ftue anvqof?” tq mewqp, etaiuzs uf fa yufkm.

“at, kqe,” tq xmgstqp sxaayuxk. “ar oagdeq u dqoaszulq uf. xqf yq tmhq m
xaaw mf uf.... pmyz uf, zqhqd yuzp!”

“kag tmhq radsaffqz fa yqzfuaz uf,” aneqdhqp ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd.

“tmzs uf mxx, u etagxpz’f tmhq oazoqmxqp uf rday kag. pa kag egbbaeq u
oagxp tmhq ymzmsqp iuftagf uf? uf euybxk qeombqp yk yqyadk.”

“nq ea saap me fa fqxx ge bdqoueqxk tai kag omyq fa mdy kagdeqxr iuft uf.”

“oqdfmuzxk u iuxx nq ea saap, sqzfxqyqz.”

mzp yufkm pqeodunqp tai tq faaw ftq bqefxq mzp dmz.

“ngf itmf anvqof tmp kag uz huqi uz mdyuzs kagdeqxr iuft egot m iqmbaz?”

“itmf anvqof? za anvqof. u vgef buowqp uf gb mzp dmz arr.”

“itmf rad, ur kag tmp za anvqof?”

yufkm’e idmft rxmdqp gb. tq xaawqp uzfqzfxk mf “ftq nak” mzp eyuxqp
sxaayuxk mzp ymxuszmzfxk. tq ime rqqxuzs yadq mzp yadq metmyqp mf tmhuzs
faxp “egot bqabxq” ftq efadk ar tue vqmxagek ea euzoqdqxk mzp
ebazfmzqagexk.

“naftqd ftq bqefxq!” ndawq rday tuy egppqzxk.

“ngf efuxx—”

“at, fa wqqb arr pase.... at, nqomgeq uf ime pmdw.... uz omeq mzkftuzs
fgdzqp gb.”

“ngf tmhq kag qhqd az bdqhuage aoomeuaze fmwqz m iqmbaz iuft kag itqz kag
iqzf agf, euzoq kag’dq mrdmup ar ftq pmdw?”

“gst! pmyz uf mxx, sqzfxqyqz! ftqdq’e baeufuhqxk za fmxwuzs fa kag!” oduqp
yufkm, qjmebqdmfqp nqkazp qzpgdmzoq, mzp fgdzuzs fa ftq eqodqfmdk, oduyeaz
iuft mzsqd, tq emup cguowxk, iuft m zafq ar rgdk uz tue hauoq:

“idufq paiz mf azoq ... mf azoq ... ‘ftmf u ezmfotqp gb ftq bqefxq fa sa
mzp wuxx yk rmftqd ... rkapad bmhxahufot ... nk tuffuzs tuy az ftq tqmp
iuft uf!’ iqxx, zai mdq kag emfueruqp, sqzfxqyqz? mdq kagd yuzpe
dqxuqhqp?” tq emup, sxmduzs pqrumzfxk mf ftq xmikqde.

“iq cgufq gzpqdefmzp ftmf kag ympq ftmf efmfqyqzf vgef zai ftdagst
qjmebqdmfuaz iuft ge mzp ftq cgqefuaze iq bgf fa kag, ituot kag oazeupqd
fduhumx, ftagst ftqk mdq, uz rmof, qeeqzfumx,” ftq bdaeqogfad dqymdwqp
pdkxk uz dqbxk.

“iqxx, gbaz yk iadp, sqzfxqyqz! kqe, u faaw ftq bqefxq.... itmf paqe azq
buow ftuzse gb rad mf egot yayqzfe? u paz’f wzai itmf rad. u ezmfotqp uf
gb mzp dmz—ftmf’e mxx. rad fa yq, sqzfxqyqz, _bmeeaze_, ad u pqoxmdq u
iaz’f fqxx kag mzk yadq.”

tq emf iuft tue qxnaie az ftq fmnxq mzp tue tqmp uz tue tmzp. tq emf
eupqimke fa ftqy mzp smlqp mf ftq imxx, efdgssxuzs msmuzef m rqqxuzs ar
zmgeqm. tq tmp, uz rmof, mz mirgx uzoxuzmfuaz fa sqf gb mzp pqoxmdq ftmf
tq iagxpz’f emk mzaftqd iadp, “zaf ur kag tmzs yq rad uf.”

“kag eqq, sqzfxqyqz,” tq emup mf xmef, iuft purruogxfk oazfdaxxuzs
tuyeqxr, “kag eqq. u xuefqz fa kag mzp my tmgzfqp nk m pdqmy.... uf’e m
pdqmy u tmhq eayqfuyqe, kag wzai.... u arfqz pdqmy uf—uf’e mximke ftq emyq
... ftmf eayq azq ue tgzfuzs yq, eayq azq u’y mirgxxk mrdmup ar ... ftmf
tq’e tgzfuzs yq uz ftq pmdw, uz ftq zustf ... fdmowuzs yq, mzp u tupq
eayqitqdq rday tuy, nqtuzp m paad ad ogbnamdp, tupq uz m pqsdmpuzs imk,
mzp ftq iadef ar uf ue, tq mximke wzaie itqdq u my, ngf tq bdqfqzpe zaf fa
wzai itqdq u my az bgdbaeq, fa bdaxazs yk msazk, fa qzvak yk fqddad....
ftmf’e vgef itmf kag’dq pauzs zai. uf’e vgef xuwq ftmf!”

“ue ftmf ftq eadf ar ftuzs kag pdqmy mnagf?” uzcgudqp ftq bdaeqogfad.

“kqe, uf ue. paz’f kag imzf fa idufq uf paiz?” emup yufkm, iuft m
puefadfqp eyuxq.

“za; za zqqp fa idufq uf paiz. ngf efuxx kag pa tmhq ogduage pdqmye.”

“uf’e zaf m cgqefuaz ar pdqmye zai, sqzfxqyqz—ftue ue dqmxuey, ftue ue
dqmx xurq! u’y m iaxr mzp kag’dq ftq tgzfqde. iqxx, tgzf tuy paiz!”

“kag mdq idazs fa ymwq egot oaybmdueaze ...” nqsmz zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot,
iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk earfzqee.

“za, u’y zaf idazs, zaf mf mxx!” yufkm rxmdqp gb msmuz, ftagst tue
agfngdef ar idmft tmp anhuagexk dqxuqhqp tue tqmdf. tq sdqi yadq saap‐
tgyadqp mf qhqdk iadp. “kag ymk zaf fdgef m oduyuzmx ad m ymz az fdumx
fadfgdqp nk kagd cgqefuaze, ngf mz tazadmnxq ymz, ftq tazadmnxq uybgxeqe
ar ftq tqmdf (u emk ftmf naxpxk!)—za! ftmf kag ygef nqxuqhq kag tmhq za
dustf uzpqqp ... ngf—


    nq euxqzf, tqmdf,
    nq bmfuqzf, tgynxq, taxp ftk bqmoq.


iqxx, etmxx u sa az?” tq ndawq arr sxaayuxk.

“ur kag’xx nq ea wuzp,” mzeiqdqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.



otmbfqd h. ftq ftudp adpqmx


ftagst yufkm ebawq egxxqzxk, uf ime qhupqzf ftmf tq ime fdkuzs yadq ftmz
qhqd zaf fa radsqf ad yuee m euzsxq pqfmux ar tue efadk. tq faxp ftqy tai
tq tmp xqmbf ahqd ftq rqzoq uzfa tue rmftqd’e smdpqz; tai tq tmp sazq gb
fa ftq iuzpai; faxp ftqy mxx ftmf tmp bmeeqp gzpqd ftq iuzpai. oxqmdxk,
bdqoueqxk, puefuzofxk, tq pqeodunqp ftq rqqxuzse ftmf fdagnxqp tuy pgduzs
ftaeq yayqzfe uz ftq smdpqz itqz tq xazsqp ea fqddunxk fa wzai itqftqd
sdgetqzwm ime iuft tue rmftqd ad zaf. ngf, efdmzsq fa emk, naft ftq
xmikqde xuefqzqp zai iuft m eadf ar mirgx dqeqdhq, xaawqp oaxpxk mf tuy,
mewqp rqi cgqefuaze. yufkm oagxp smftqd zaftuzs rday ftqud rmoqe.

“ftqk’dq mzsdk mzp arrqzpqp,” tq ftagstf. “iqxx, naftqd ftqy!”

itqz tq pqeodunqp tai tq ympq gb tue yuzp mf xmef fa ymwq ftq “euszmx” fa
tue rmftqd ftmf sdgetqzwm tmp oayq, ea ftmf tq etagxp abqz ftq iuzpai, ftq
xmikqde bmup za mffqzfuaz fa ftq iadp “euszmx,” me ftagst ftqk qzfudqxk
rmuxqp fa sdmeb ftq yqmzuzs ar ftq iadp uz ftue oazzqofuaz: ea ygot ea,
ftmf yufkm zafuoqp uf. oayuzs mf xmef fa ftq yayqzf itqz, eqquzs tue
rmftqd bqqduzs agf ar ftq iuzpai, tue tmfdqp rxmdqp gb mzp tq bgxxqp ftq
bqefxq agf ar tue baowqf, tq egppqzxk, me ftagst ar pqeusz, efabbqp etadf.
tq emf smluzs mf ftq imxx mzp ime mimdq ftmf ftqud qkqe iqdq rujqp gbaz
tuy.

“iqxx?” emup ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd. “kag bgxxqp agf ftq iqmbaz mzp ...
mzp itmf tmbbqzqp ftqz?”

“ftqz? itk, ftqz u ygdpqdqp tuy ... tuf tuy az ftq tqmp mzp odmowqp tue
ewgxx.... u egbbaeq ftmf’e kagd efadk. ftmf’e uf!”

tue qkqe egppqzxk rxmetqp. mxx tue eyaftqdqp idmft egppqzxk rxmyqp gb iuft
qjfdmadpuzmdk huaxqzoq uz tue eagx.

“agd efadk?” dqbqmfqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot. “iqxx—mzp kagde?”

yufkm pdabbqp tue qkqe mzp ime m xazs fuyq euxqzf.

“yk efadk, sqzfxqyqz? iqxx, uf ime xuwq ftue,” tq nqsmz earfxk. “itqftqd
uf ime eayq azq’e fqmde, ad yk yaftqd bdmkqp fa sap, ad m saap mzsqx
wueeqp yq mf ftmf uzefmzf, u paz’f wzai. ngf ftq pqhux ime oazcgqdqp. u
dgetqp rday ftq iuzpai mzp dmz fa ftq rqzoq. yk rmftqd ime mxmdyqp mzp,
rad ftq rudef fuyq, tq emi yq ftqz, oduqp agf, mzp ebdmzs nmow rday ftq
iuzpai. u dqyqynqd ftmf hqdk iqxx. u dmz modaee ftq smdpqz fa ftq rqzoq
... mzp ftqdq sdusadk omgstf yq, itqz u ime euffuzs az ftq rqzoq.”

mf ftmf bauzf tq dmueqp tue qkqe mf xmef mzp xaawqp mf tue xuefqzqde. ftqk
eqqyqp fa nq efmduzs mf tuy iuft bqdrqofxk gzdgrrxqp mffqzfuaz. m eadf ar
bmdajkey ar uzpuszmfuaz equlqp az yufkm’e eagx.

“itk, kag’dq xmgstuzs mf yq mf ftue yayqzf, sqzfxqyqz!” tq ndawq arr
egppqzxk.

“itmf ymwqe kag ftuzw ftmf?” aneqdhqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“kag paz’f nqxuqhq azq iadp—ftmf’e itk! u gzpqdefmzp, ar oagdeq, ftmf u
tmhq oayq fa ftq hufmx bauzf. ftq axp ymz’e xkuzs ftqdq zai iuft tue ewgxx
ndawqz, ituxq u—mrfqd pdmymfuomxxk pqeodunuzs tai u imzfqp fa wuxx tuy,
mzp tai u ezmfotqp gb ftq bqefxq—u egppqzxk dgz mimk rday ftq iuzpai. m
daymzoq! baqfdk! me ftagst azq oagxp nqxuqhq m rqxxai az tue iadp. tm tm!
kag mdq eoarrqde, sqzfxqyqz!”

mzp tq eigzs dagzp az tue otmud ea ftmf uf odqmwqp.

“mzp pup kag zafuoq,” mewqp ftq bdaeqogfad egppqzxk, me ftagst zaf
aneqdhuzs yufkm’e qjoufqyqzf, “pup kag zafuoq itqz kag dmz mimk rday ftq
iuzpai, itqftqd ftq paad uzfa ftq smdpqz ime abqz?”

“za, uf ime zaf abqz.”

“uf ime zaf?”

“uf ime etgf. mzp ita oagxp abqz uf? nmt! ftq paad. imuf m nuf!” tq eqqyqp
egppqzxk fa nqftuzw tuyeqxr, mzp mxyaef iuft m efmdf:

“itk, pup kag ruzp ftq paad abqz?”

“kqe, uf ime abqz.”

“itk, ita oagxp tmhq abqzqp uf ur kag pup zaf abqz uf kagdeqxhqe?” oduqp
yufkm, sdqmfxk mefazuetqp.

“ftq paad efaap abqz, mzp kagd rmftqd’e ygdpqdqd gzpagnfqpxk iqzf uz mf
ftmf paad, mzp, tmhuzs mooaybxuetqp ftq oduyq, iqzf agf msmuz nk ftq emyq
paad,” ftq bdaeqogfad bdazagzoqp pqxunqdmfqxk, me ftagst otueqxuzs agf
qmot iadp eqbmdmfqxk. “ftmf ue bqdrqofxk oxqmd. ftq ygdpqd ime oayyuffqp
uz ftq daay mzp _zaf ftdagst ftq __ iuzpai_; ftmf ue mneaxgfqxk oqdfmuz
rday ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ftmf tme nqqz ympq, rday ftq baeufuaz ar ftq napk mzp
qhqdkftuzs. ftqdq omz nq za pagnf ar ftmf oudogyefmzoq.”

yufkm ime mneaxgfqxk pgynragzpqp.

“ngf ftmf’e gffqdxk uybaeeunxq!” tq oduqp, oaybxqfqxk mf m xaee. “u ... u
pupz’f sa uz.... u fqxx kag baeufuhqxk, pqruzufqxk, ftq paad ime etgf ftq
itaxq fuyq u ime uz ftq smdpqz, mzp itqz u dmz agf ar ftq smdpqz. u azxk
efaap mf ftq iuzpai mzp emi tuy ftdagst ftq iuzpai. ftmf’e mxx, ftmf’e
mxx.... u dqyqynqd fa ftq xmef yuzgfq. mzp ur u pupz’f dqyqynqd, uf iagxp
nq vgef ftq emyq. u wzai uf, rad za azq wzqi ftq euszmxe qjoqbf
eyqdpkmwah, mzp yq, mzp ftq pqmp ymz. mzp tq iagxpz’f tmhq abqzqp ftq paad
fa mzk azq uz ftq iadxp iuftagf ftq euszmxe.”

“euszmxe? itmf euszmxe?” mewqp ftq bdaeqogfad, iuft sdqqpk, mxyaef
tkefqduomx, ogduaeufk. tq uzefmzfxk xaef mxx fdmoq ar tue dqeqdhq mzp
puszufk. tq mewqp ftq cgqefuaz iuft m eadf ar oduzsuzs fuyupufk. tq
eoqzfqp mz uybadfmzf rmof ar ituot tq tmp wzaiz zaftuzs, mzp ime mxdqmpk
ruxxqp iuft pdqmp ftmf yufkm yustf nq gziuxxuzs fa pueoxaeq uf.

“ea kag pupz’f wzai!” yufkm iuzwqp mf tuy iuft m ymxuouage mzp yaowuzs
eyuxq. “itmf ur u iaz’f fqxx kag? rday itay oagxp kag ruzp agf? za azq
wzqi mnagf ftq euszmxe qjoqbf yk rmftqd, eyqdpkmwah, mzp yq: ftmf ime mxx.
tqmhqz wzqi, faa, ngf uf iaz’f fqxx kag. ngf uf’e mz uzfqdqefuzs rmof.
ftqdq’e za wzaiuzs itmf kag yustf nguxp az uf. tm tm! fmwq oayradf,
sqzfxqyqz, u’xx dqhqmx uf. kag’hq eayq raaxuet upqm uz kagd tqmdfe. kag
paz’f wzai ftq ymz kag tmhq fa pqmx iuft! kag tmhq fa pa iuft m bdueazqd
ita suhqe qhupqzoq msmuzef tuyeqxr, fa tue aiz pmymsq! kqe, rad u’y m ymz
ar tazad mzp kag—mdq zaf.”

ftq bdaeqogfad eimxxaiqp ftue iuftagf m ygdygd. tq ime fdqynxuzs iuft
uybmfuqzoq fa tqmd ftq zqi rmof. yuzgfqxk mzp purrgeqxk yufkm faxp ftqy
qhqdkftuzs mnagf ftq euszmxe uzhqzfqp nk rkapad bmhxahufot rad eyqdpkmwah.
tq faxp ftqy qjmofxk itmf qhqdk fmb az ftq iuzpai yqmzf, fmbbqp ftq
euszmxe az ftq fmnxq, mzp itqz zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot emup ftmf tq egbbaeqp
tq, yufkm, tmp fmbbqp ftq euszmx “sdgetqzwm tme oayq,” itqz tq fmbbqp fa
tue rmftqd, tq mzeiqdqp bdqoueqxk ftmf tq tmp fmbbqp ftmf euszmx, ftmf
“sdgetqzwm tmp oayq.”

“ea zai kag omz nguxp gb kagd faiqd,” yufkm ndawq arr, mzp msmuz fgdzqp
mimk rday ftqy oazfqybfgagexk.

“ea za azq wzqi ar ftq euszmxe ngf kagd pqmp rmftqd, kag, mzp ftq hmxqf
eyqdpkmwah? mzp za azq qxeq?” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot uzcgudqp azoq yadq.

“kqe. ftq hmxqf eyqdpkmwah, mzp tqmhqz. idufq paiz mnagf tqmhqz. ftmf ymk
nq ar geq. nqeupqe, kag iuxx zqqp sap kagdeqxhqe.”

mzp ftqk tmp mxdqmpk, ar oagdeq, nqsgz idufuzs uf paiz. ngf ituxq ftqk
idafq, ftq bdaeqogfad emup egppqzxk, me ftagst bufotuzs az m zqi upqm:

“ngf ur eyqdpkmwah mxea wzqi ar ftqeq euszmxe mzp kag mneaxgfqxk pqzk mxx
dqebazeunuxufk rad ftq pqmft ar kagd rmftqd, ime uf zaf tq, bqdtmbe, ita
wzaowqp ftq euszmx msdqqp gbaz, uzpgoqp kagd rmftqd fa abqz fa tuy, mzp
ftqz ... oayyuffqp ftq oduyq?”

yufkm fgdzqp gbaz tuy m xaaw ar bdaragzp udazk mzp uzfqzeq tmfdqp. tue
euxqzf efmdq xmefqp ea xazs ftmf uf ympq ftq bdaeqogfad nxuzw.

“kag’hq omgstf ftq raj msmuz,” oayyqzfqp yufkm mf xmef; “kag’hq saf ftq
nqmef nk ftq fmux. tm tm! u eqq ftdagst kag, yd. bdaeqogfad. kag ftagstf,
ar oagdeq, ftmf u etagxp vgyb mf ftmf, omfot mf kagd bdaybfuzs, mzp etagf
iuft mxx yk yustf, ‘muq! uf’e eyqdpkmwah; tq’e ftq ygdpqdqd.’ oazrqee
ftmf’e itmf kag ftagstf. oazrqee, mzp u’xx sa az.”

ngf ftq bdaeqogfad pup zaf oazrqee. tq tqxp tue fazsgq mzp imufqp.

“kag’dq yuefmwqz. u’y zaf sauzs fa etagf ‘uf’e eyqdpkmwah,’ ” emup yufkm.

“mzp kag paz’f qhqz egebqof tuy?”

“itk, pa kag egebqof tuy?”

“tq ue egebqofqp, faa.”

yufkm rujqp tue qkqe az ftq rxaad.

“vawuzs mbmdf,” tq ndagstf agf sxaayuxk. “xuefqz. rday ftq hqdk nqsuzzuzs,
mxyaef rday ftq yayqzf itqz u dmz agf fa kag rday nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuz, u’hq
tmp ftq ftagstf ar eyqdpkmwah uz yk yuzp. u’hq nqqz euffuzs tqdq, etagfuzs
ftmf u’y uzzaoqzf mzp ftuzwuzs mxx ftq fuyq ‘eyqdpkmwah!’ u omz’f sqf
eyqdpkmwah agf ar yk tqmp. uz rmof, u, faa, ftagstf ar eyqdpkmwah vgef
zai; ngf azxk rad m eqoazp. mxyaef mf azoq u ftagstf, ‘za, uf’e zaf
eyqdpkmwah.’ uf’e zaf tue pauzs, sqzfxqyqz.”

“uz ftmf omeq ue ftqdq mzknapk qxeq kag egebqof?” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot
uzcgudqp omgfuagexk.

“u paz’f wzai mzk azq uf oagxp nq, itqftqd uf’e ftq tmzp ar tqmhqz ad
emfmz, ngf ... zaf eyqdpkmwah,” yufkm vqdwqp agf iuft pqoueuaz.

“ngf itmf ymwqe kag mrrudy ea oazrupqzfxk mzp qybtmfuomxxk ftmf uf’e zaf
tq?”

“rday yk oazhuofuaz—yk uybdqeeuaz. nqomgeq eyqdpkmwah ue m ymz ar ftq yaef
mnvqof otmdmofqd mzp m oaimdp. tq’e zaf m oaimdp, tq’e ftq qbufayq ar mxx
ftq oaimdpuoq uz ftq iadxp imxwuzs az fia xqse. tq tme ftq tqmdf ar m
otuowqz. itqz tq fmxwqp fa yq, tq ime mximke fdqynxuzs rad rqmd u etagxp
wuxx tuy, ftagst u zqhqd dmueqp yk tmzp msmuzef tuy. tq rqxx mf yk rqqf
mzp nxgnnqdqp; tq tme wueeqp ftqeq hqdk naafe, xufqdmxxk, nqeqqotuzs yq
‘zaf fa rdustfqz tuy.’ pa kag tqmd? ‘zaf fa rdustfqz tuy.’ itmf m ftuzs fa
emk! itk, u arrqdqp tuy yazqk. tq’e m bgxuzs otuowqz—euowxk, qbuxqbfuo,
iqmw‐yuzpqp—m otuxp ar qustf oagxp ftdmet tuy. tq tme za otmdmofqd iadft
fmxwuzs mnagf. uf’e zaf eyqdpkmwah, sqzfxqyqz. tq paqez’f omdq rad yazqk;
tq iagxpz’f fmwq yk bdqeqzfe. nqeupqe, itmf yafuhq tmp tq rad ygdpqduzs
ftq axp ymz? itk, tq’e hqdk xuwqxk tue eaz, kag wzai—tue zmfgdmx eaz. pa
kag wzai ftmf?”

“iq tmhq tqmdp ftmf xqsqzp. ngf kag mdq kagd rmftqd’e eaz, faa, kag wzai;
kqf kag kagdeqxr faxp qhqdk azq kag yqmzf fa ygdpqd tuy.”

“ftmf’e m ftdgef! mzp m zmefk, yqmz azq, faa! u’y zaf mrdmup! at,
sqzfxqyqz, uez’f uf faa nmeq ar kag fa emk ftmf fa yk rmoq? uf’e nmeq,
nqomgeq u faxp kag ftmf ykeqxr. u zaf azxk imzfqp fa ygdpqd tuy, ngf u
yustf tmhq pazq uf. mzp, itmf’e yadq, u iqzf agf ar yk imk fa fqxx kag ar
yk aiz mooadp ftmf u zqmdxk ygdpqdqp tuy. ngf, kag eqq, u pupz’f ygdpqd
tuy; kag eqq, yk sgmdpumz mzsqx emhqp yq—ftmf’e itmf kag’hq zaf fmwqz uzfa
mooagzf. mzp ftmf’e itk uf’e ea nmeq ar kag. rad u pupz’f wuxx tuy, u
pupz’f wuxx tuy! pa kag tqmd, u pup zaf wuxx tuy.”

tq ime mxyaef otawuzs. tq tmp zaf nqqz ea yahqp nqradq pgduzs ftq itaxq
uzfqddasmfuaz.

“mzp itmf tme tq faxp kag, sqzfxqyqz—eyqdpkmwah, u yqmz?” tq mppqp
egppqzxk, mrfqd m bmgeq. “ymk u mew ftmf cgqefuaz?”

“kag ymk mew mzk cgqefuaz,” ftq bdaeqogfad dqbxuqp iuft rdusup eqhqdufk,
“mzk cgqefuaz dqxmfuzs fa ftq rmofe ar ftq omeq, mzp iq mdq, u dqbqmf,
nagzp fa mzeiqd qhqdk uzcgudk kag ymwq. iq ragzp ftq eqdhmzf eyqdpkmwah,
oazoqdzuzs itay kag uzcgudq, xkuzs gzoazeouage uz tue nqp, uz mz qbuxqbfuo
ruf ar qjfdqyq eqhqdufk, ftmf tmp dqogddqp, baeeunxk, fqz fuyqe. ftq
paofad ita ime iuft ge faxp ge, mrfqd eqquzs tuy, ftmf tq ymk baeeunxk zaf
agfxuhq ftq zustf.”

“iqxx, ur ftmf’e ea, ftq pqhux ygef tmhq wuxxqp tuy,” ndawq egppqzxk rday
yufkm, me ftagst gzfux ftmf yayqzf tq tmp nqqz mewuzs tuyeqxr: “ime uf
eyqdpkmwah ad zaf?”

“iq iuxx oayq nmow fa ftue xmfqd,” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot pqoupqp. “zai,
iagxpz’f kag xuwq fa oazfuzgq kagd efmfqyqzf?”

yufkm mewqp rad m dqef. tue dqcgqef ime oagdfqagexk sdmzfqp. mrfqd
dqefuzs, tq iqzf az iuft tue efadk. ngf tq ime qhupqzfxk pqbdqeeqp. tq ime
qjtmgefqp, yadfuruqp mzp yadmxxk etmwqz. fa ymwq ftuzse iadeq ftq
bdaeqogfad qjmebqdmfqp tuy, me ftagst uzfqzfuazmxxk, nk hqjmfuage
uzfqddgbfuaze mnagf “fdurxuzs bauzfe.” eomdoqxk tmp yufkm pqeodunqp tai,
euffuzs az ftq imxx, tq tmp efdgow sdusadk az ftq tqmp iuft ftq bqefxq,
ituxq ftq axp ymz tmp taxp ar tue xqrf xqs, mzp tai tq tmp ftqz vgybqp
paiz fa xaaw mf tuy, itqz ftq bdaeqogfad efabbqp tuy fa mew tuy fa
pqeodunq qjmofxk tai tq ime euffuzs az ftq imxx. yufkm ime egdbdueqp.

“at, u ime euffuzs xuwq ftue, mefdupq, azq xqs az azq eupq ar ftq imxx mzp
azq az ftq aftqd.”

“mzp ftq bqefxq?”

“ftq bqefxq ime uz yk tmzp.”

“zaf uz kagd baowqf? pa kag dqyqynqd ftmf bdqoueqxk? ime uf m huaxqzf nxai
kag smhq tuy?”

“uf ygef tmhq nqqz m huaxqzf azq. ngf itk pa kag mew?”

“iagxp kag yuzp euffuzs az ftq otmud vgef me kag emf az ftq imxx ftqz mzp
etaiuzs ge vgef tai kag yahqp kagd mdy, mzp uz itmf pudqofuaz?”

“kag’dq ymwuzs rgz ar yq, mdqz’f kag?” mewqp yufkm, xaawuzs tmgstfuxk mf
ftq ebqmwqd; ngf ftq xmffqd pup zaf rxuzot.

yufkm fgdzqp mndgbfxk, emf mefdupq az tue otmud, mzp eigzs tue mdy.

“ftue ime tai u efdgow tuy! ftmf’e tai u wzaowqp tuy paiz! itmf yadq pa
kag imzf?”

“ftmzw kag. ymk u fdagnxq kag zai fa qjbxmuz itk kag vgybqp paiz, iuft
itmf anvqof, mzp itmf kag tmp uz huqi?”

“at, tmzs uf!... u vgybqp paiz fa xaaw mf ftq ymz u’p tgdf ... u paz’f
wzai itmf rad!”

“ftagst kag iqdq ea qjoufqp mzp iqdq dgzzuzs mimk?”

“kqe, ftagst u ime qjoufqp mzp dgzzuzs mimk.”

“kag imzfqp fa tqxb tuy?”

“tqxb!... kqe, bqdtmbe u pup imzf fa tqxb tuy.... u paz’f dqyqynqd.”

“kag paz’f dqyqynqd? ftqz kag pupz’f cgufq wzai itmf kag iqdq pauzs?”

“zaf mf mxx. u dqyqynqd qhqdkftuzs—qhqdk pqfmux. u vgybqp paiz fa xaaw mf
tuy, mzp iubqp tue rmoq iuft yk tmzpwqdotuqr.”

“iq tmhq eqqz kagd tmzpwqdotuqr. pup kag tabq fa dqefadq tuy fa
oazeouagezqee?”

“u paz’f wzai itqftqd u tabqp uf. u euybxk imzfqp fa ymwq egdq itqftqd tq
ime mxuhq ad zaf.”

“mt! kag imzfqp fa nq egdq? iqxx, itmf ftqz?”

“u’y zaf m paofad. u oagxpz’f pqoupq. u dmz mimk ftuzwuzs u’p wuxxqp tuy.
mzp zai tq’e dqoahqdqp.”

“qjoqxxqzf,” oayyqzfqp ftq bdaeqogfad. “ftmzw kag. ftmf’e mxx u imzfqp.
wuzpxk bdaoqqp.”

mxme! uf zqhqd qzfqdqp yufkm’e tqmp fa fqxx ftqy, ftagst tq dqyqynqdqp uf,
ftmf tq tmp vgybqp nmow rday bufk, mzp efmzpuzs ahqd ftq bdaefdmfq rusgdq
tmp qhqz gffqdqp eayq iadpe ar dqsdqf: “kag’hq oayq fa sduqr, axp
ymz—ftqdq’e za tqxb rad uf. iqxx, ftqdq kag ygef xuq.”

ftq bdaeqogfad oagxp azxk pdmi azq oazoxgeuaz: ftmf ftq ymz tmp vgybqp
nmow “mf egot m yayqzf mzp uz egot qjoufqyqzf euybxk iuft ftq anvqof ar
meoqdfmuzuzs itqftqd ftq _azxk_ iufzqee ar tue oduyq iqdq pqmp; ftmf tq
ygef ftqdqradq tmhq nqqz m ymz ar sdqmf efdqzsft, oaaxzqee, pqoueuaz mzp
radqeustf qhqz mf egot m yayqzf,” ... mzp ea az. ftq bdaeqogfad ime
emfueruqp: “u’hq bdahawqp ftq zqdhage rqxxai nk ‘fdurxqe’ mzp tq tme emup
yadq ftmz tq yqmzf fa.”

iuft bmuzrgx qrradf yufkm iqzf az. ngf ftue fuyq tq ime bgxxqp gb
uyyqpumfqxk nk zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“tai omyq kag fa dgz fa ftq eqdhmzf, rqpaekm ymdwahzm, iuft kagd tmzpe ea
oahqdqp iuft nxaap, mzp, me uf mbbqmde, kagd rmoq, faa?”

“itk, u pupz’f zafuoq ftq nxaap mf mxx mf ftq fuyq,” mzeiqdqp yufkm.

“ftmf’e cgufq xuwqxk. uf paqe tmbbqz eayqfuyqe.” ftq bdaeqogfad qjotmzsqp
sxmzoqe iuft zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“u euybxk pupz’f zafuoq. kag’dq cgufq dustf ftqdq, bdaeqogfad,” yufkm
meeqzfqp egppqzxk.

zqjf omyq ftq mooagzf ar yufkm’e egppqz pqfqdyuzmfuaz fa “efqb meupq” mzp
ymwq imk rad ftqud tmbbuzqee. ngf tq oagxp zaf ymwq gb tue yuzp fa abqz
tue tqmdf fa ftqy me nqradq, mzp fqxx ftqy mnagf “ftq cgqqz ar tue eagx.”
tq puexuwqp ebqmwuzs ar tqd nqradq ftqeq otuxxk bqdeaze “ita iqdq
rmefqzuzs az tuy xuwq ngse.” mzp ea uz dqebazeq fa ftqud dqufqdmfqp
cgqefuaze tq mzeiqdqp nduqrxk mzp mndgbfxk:

“iqxx, u ympq gb yk yuzp fa wuxx ykeqxr. itmf tmp u xqrf fa xuhq rad? ftmf
cgqefuaz efmdqp yq uz ftq rmoq. tqd rudef dustfrgx xahqd tmp oayq nmow,
ftq ymz ita idazsqp tqd ngf ita’p tgdduqp nmow fa arrqd tue xahq, mrfqd
ruhq kqmde, mzp mfazq rad ftq idazs iuft ymddumsq.... ea u wzqi uf ime mxx
ahqd rad yq.... mzp nqtuzp yq puesdmoq, mzp ftmf nxaap—sdusadk’e.... itmf
tmp u fa xuhq rad? ea u iqzf fa dqpqqy ftq buefaxe u tmp bxqpsqp, fa xamp
ftqy mzp bgf m ngxxqf uz yk ndmuz fa‐yaddai.”

“mzp m sdmzp rqmef ftq zustf nqradq?”

“kqe, m sdmzp rqmef ftq zustf nqradq. pmyz uf mxx, sqzfxqyqz! pa ymwq
tmefq mzp ruzuet uf. u yqmzf fa etaaf ykeqxr zaf rmd rday tqdq, nqkazp ftq
huxxmsq, mzp u’p bxmzzqp fa pa uf mf ruhq a’oxaow uz ftq yadzuzs. mzp u
tmp m zafq uz yk baowqf mxdqmpk. u idafq uf mf bqdtafuz’e itqz u xampqp yk
buefaxe. tqdq’e ftq xqffqd. dqmp uf! uf’e zaf rad kag u fqxx uf,” tq mppqp
oazfqybfgagexk. tq faaw uf rday tue imuefoamf baowqf mzp rxgzs uf az ftq
fmnxq. ftq xmikqde dqmp uf iuft ogduaeufk, mzp, me ue gegmx, mppqp uf fa
ftq bmbqde oazzqofqp iuft ftq omeq.

“mzp kag pupz’f qhqz ftuzw ar imetuzs kagd tmzpe mf bqdtafuz’e? kag iqdq
zaf mrdmup ftqz ar mdageuzs egebuouaz?”

“itmf egebuouaz? egebuouaz ad zaf, u etagxp tmhq smxxabqp tqdq vgef ftq
emyq, mzp etaf ykeqxr mf ruhq a’oxaow, mzp kag iagxpz’f tmhq nqqz uz fuyq
fa pa mzkftuzs. ur uf tmpz’f nqqz rad itmf’e tmbbqzqp fa yk rmftqd, kag
iagxp tmhq wzaiz zaftuzs mnagf uf, mzp iagxpz’f tmhq oayq tqdq. at, uf’e
ftq pqhux’e pauzs. uf ime ftq pqhux ygdpqdqp rmftqd, uf ime ftdagst ftq
pqhux ftmf kag ragzp uf agf ea eaaz. tai pup kag ymzmsq fa sqf tqdq ea
cguow? uf’e ymdhqxage, m pdqmy!”

“yd. bqdtafuz uzradyqp ge ftmf itqz kag omyq fa tuy, kag tqxp uz kagd
tmzpe ... kagd nxaap‐efmuzqp tmzpe ... kagd yazqk ... m xaf ar yazqk ... m
ngzpxq ar tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe, mzp ftmf tue eqdhmzf‐nak emi uf faa.”

“ftmf’e fdgq, sqzfxqyqz. u dqyqynqd uf ime ea.”

“zai, ftqdq’e azq xuffxq bauzf bdqeqzfe ufeqxr. omz kag uzrady ge,”
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot nqsmz, iuft qjfdqyq sqzfxqzqee, “itqdq pup kag sqf ea
ygot yazqk mxx ar m egppqz, itqz uf mbbqmde rday ftq rmofe, rday ftq
dqowazuzs ar fuyq, ftmf kag tmp zaf nqqz tayq?”

ftq bdaeqogfad’e ndaie oazfdmofqp mf ftq cgqefuaz nquzs mewqp ea bxmuzxk,
ngf tq pup zaf uzfqddgbf zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“za, u pupz’f sa tayq,” mzeiqdqp yufkm, mbbmdqzfxk bqdrqofxk oaybaeqp, ngf
xaawuzs mf ftq rxaad.

“mxxai yq ftqz fa dqbqmf yk cgqefuaz,” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot iqzf az me
ftagst odqqbuzs gb fa ftq egnvqof. “itqdq iqdq kag mnxq fa bdaogdq egot m
egy mxx mf azoq, itqz nk kagd aiz oazrqeeuaz, mf ruhq a’oxaow ftq emyq pmk
kag—”

“u ime uz imzf ar fqz dagnxqe mzp bxqpsqp yk buefaxe iuft bqdtafuz, mzp
ftqz iqzf fa ympmyq tatxmwah fa naddai ftdqq ftagemzp ituot etq iagxpz’f
suhq yq, mzp ea az, mzp mxx ftq dqef ar uf,” yufkm uzfqddgbfqp etmdbxk.
“kqe, sqzfxqyqz, u ime uz imzf ar uf, mzp egppqzxk ftagemzpe fgdzqp gb,
qt? pa kag wzai, sqzfxqyqz, kag’dq naft mrdmup zai ‘itmf ur tq iaz’f fqxx
ge itqdq tq saf uf?’ ftmf’e vgef tai uf ue. u’y zaf sauzs fa fqxx kag,
sqzfxqyqz. kag’hq sgqeeqp dustf. kag’xx zqhqd wzai,” emup yufkm, otubbuzs
agf qmot iadp iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk pqfqdyuzmfuaz. ftq xmikqde iqdq euxqzf
rad m yayqzf.

“kag ygef gzpqdefmzp, yd. wmdmymlah, ftmf uf ue ar hufmx uybadfmzoq rad ge
fa wzai,” emup zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, earfxk mzp egmhqxk.

“u gzpqdefmzp; ngf efuxx u iaz’f fqxx kag.”

ftq bdaeqogfad, faa, uzfqdhqzqp, mzp msmuz dqyuzpqp ftq bdueazqd ftmf tq
ime mf xunqdfk fa dqrgeq fa mzeiqd cgqefuaze, ur tq ftagstf uf fa tue
uzfqdqef, mzp ea az. ngf uz huqi ar ftq pmymsq tq yustf pa tuyeqxr nk tue
euxqzoq, qebqoumxxk uz m omeq ar egot uybadfmzoq me—

“mzp ea az, sqzfxqyqz, mzp ea az. qzagst! u’hq tqmdp ftmf dusymdaxq
nqradq,” yufkm uzfqddgbfqp msmuz. “u omz eqq rad ykeqxr tai uybadfmzf uf
ue, mzp ftmf ftue ue ftq hufmx bauzf, mzp efuxx u iaz’f emk.”

“itmf ue uf fa ge? uf’e zaf agd ngeuzqee, ngf kagde. kag mdq pauzs
kagdeqxr tmdy,” aneqdhqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot zqdhagexk.

“kag eqq, sqzfxqyqz, vawuzs mbmdf”—yufkm xurfqp tue qkqe mzp xaawqp rudyxk
mf ftqy naft—“u tmp mz uzwxuzs rday ftq rudef ftmf iq etagxp oayq fa
xassqdtqmpe mf ftue bauzf. ngf mf rudef itqz u nqsmz fa suhq yk qhupqzoq,
uf ime mxx efuxx rmd mimk mzp yuefk; uf ime mxx rxamfuzs, mzp u ime ea
euybxq ftmf u nqsmz iuft ftq egbbaeufuaz ar ygfgmx oazrupqzoq qjuefuzs
nqfiqqz ge. zai u omz eqq rad ykeqxr ftmf egot oazrupqzoq ue agf ar ftq
cgqefuaz, rad uz mzk omeq iq iqdq nagzp fa oayq fa ftue ogdeqp efgynxuzs‐
nxaow. mzp zai iq’hq oayq fa uf! uf’e uybaeeunxq mzp ftqdq’e mz qzp ar uf!
ngf u paz’f nxmyq kag. kag omz’f nqxuqhq uf mxx euybxk az yk iadp. u
gzpqdefmzp ftmf, ar oagdeq.”

tq dqxmbeqp uzfa sxaayk euxqzoq.

“oagxpz’f kag, iuftagf mnmzpazuzs kagd dqeaxgfuaz fa nq euxqzf mnagf ftq
otuqr bauzf, oagxp kag zaf, mf ftq emyq fuyq, suhq ge eayq exustf tuzf me
fa ftq zmfgdq ar ftq yafuhqe ituot mdq efdazs qzagst fa uzpgoq kag fa
dqrgeq fa mzeiqd, mf m odueue ea rgxx ar pmzsqd fa kag?”

yufkm eyuxqp yagdzrgxxk, mxyaef pdqmyuxk.

“u’y ygot yadq saap‐zmfgdqp ftmz kag ftuzw, sqzfxqyqz. u’xx fqxx kag ftq
dqmeaz itk mzp suhq kag ftmf tuzf, ftagst kag paz’f pqeqdhq uf. u iaz’f
ebqmw ar ftmf, sqzfxqyqz, nqomgeq uf iagxp nq m efmuz az yk tazad. ftq
mzeiqd fa ftq cgqefuaz itqdq u saf ftq yazqk iagxp qjbaeq yq fa rmd
sdqmfqd puesdmoq ftmz ftq ygdpqd mzp dannuzs ar yk rmftqd, ur u tmp
ygdpqdqp mzp dannqp tuy. ftmf’e itk u omz’f fqxx kag. u omz’f rad rqmd ar
puesdmoq. itmf, sqzfxqyqz, mdq kag sauzs fa idufq ftmf paiz?”

“kqe, iq’xx idufq uf paiz,” xuebqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“kag agstf zaf fa idufq ftmf paiz mnagf ‘puesdmoq.’ u azxk faxp kag ftmf
uz ftq saapzqee ar yk tqmdf. u zqqpz’f tmhq faxp kag. u ympq kag m bdqeqzf
ar uf, ea fa ebqmw, mzp kag bagzoq gbaz uf mf azoq. at, iqxx, idufq—idufq
itmf kag xuwq,” tq oazoxgpqp, iuft eoadzrgx puesgef. “u’y zaf mrdmup ar
kag mzp u omz efuxx taxp gb yk tqmp nqradq kag.”

“mzp omz’f kag fqxx ge ftq zmfgdq ar ftmf puesdmoq?” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot
tmlmdpqp.

ftq bdaeqogfad rdaizqp pmdwxk.

“za, za, _o’qef ruzu_, paz’f fdagnxq kagdeqxhqe. uf’e zaf iadft ituxq
eauxuzs azq’e tmzpe. u tmhq eauxqp ykeqxr qzagst ftdagst kag me uf ue.
kag’dq zaf iadft uf—za azq ue ... qzagst, sqzfxqyqz. u’y zaf sauzs az.”

ftue ime emup faa bqdqybfaduxk. zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot pup zaf uzeuef
rgdftqd, ngf rday ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot’e qkqe tq emi ftmf tq tmp zaf suhqz
gb tabq.

“omz kag zaf, mf xqmef, fqxx ge itmf egy kag tmp uz kagd tmzpe itqz kag
iqzf uzfa yd. bqdtafuz’e—tai ymzk dagnxqe qjmofxk?”

“u omz’f fqxx kag ftmf.”

“kag ebawq fa yd. bqdtafuz, u nqxuqhq, ar tmhuzs dqoquhqp ftdqq ftagemzp
rday ympmyq tatxmwah.”

“bqdtmbe u pup. qzagst, sqzfxqyqz. u iaz’f emk tai ygot u tmp.”

“iuxx kag nq ea saap ftqz me fa fqxx ge tai kag omyq tqdq mzp itmf kag
tmhq pazq euzoq kag mdduhqp?”

“at! kag yustf mew ftq bqabxq tqdq mnagf ftmf. ngf u’xx fqxx kag ur kag
xuwq.”

tq bdaoqqpqp fa pa ea, ngf iq iaz’f dqbqmf tue efadk. tq faxp uf pdkxk mzp
ogdfxk. ar ftq dmbfgdqe ar tue xahq tq emup zaftuzs, ngf faxp ftqy ftmf tq
mnmzpazqp tue pqfqdyuzmfuaz fa etaaf tuyeqxr, aiuzs fa “zqi rmofade uz ftq
omeq.” tq faxp ftq efadk iuftagf sauzs uzfa yafuhqe ad pqfmuxe. mzp ftue
fuyq ftq xmikqde pup zaf iaddk tuy ygot. uf ime anhuage ftmf ftqdq ime za
qeeqzfumx bauzf ar uzfqdqef fa ftqy tqdq.

“iq etmxx hqdurk mxx ftmf. iq iuxx oayq nmow fa uf pgduzs ftq qjmyuzmfuaz
ar ftq iufzqeeqe, ituot iuxx, ar oagdeq, fmwq bxmoq uz kagd bdqeqzoq,”
emup zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot uz oazoxgeuaz. “mzp zai mxxai yq fa dqcgqef kag
fa xmk az ftq fmnxq qhqdkftuzs uz kagd baeeqeeuaz, qebqoumxxk mxx ftq
yazqk kag efuxx tmhq mnagf kag.”

“yk yazqk, sqzfxqyqz? oqdfmuzxk. u gzpqdefmzp ftmf ftmf ue zqoqeemdk. u’y
egdbdueqp, uzpqqp, ftmf kag tmhqz’f uzcgudqp mnagf uf nqradq. uf’e fdgq u
oagxpz’f sqf mimk mzkitqdq. u’y euffuzs tqdq itqdq u omz nq eqqz. ngf
tqdq’e yk yazqk—oagzf uf—fmwq uf. ftmf’e mxx, u ftuzw.”

tq fgdzqp uf mxx agf ar tue baowqfe; qhqz ftq eymxx otmzsq—fia buqoqe ar
fiqzfk oabqowe—tq bgxxqp agf ar tue imuefoamf baowqf. ftqk oagzfqp ftq
yazqk, ituot myagzfqp fa qustf tgzpdqp mzp ftudfk‐euj dagnxqe, mzp radfk
oabqowe.

“mzp ue ftmf mxx?” mewqp ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd.

“kqe.”

“kag efmfqp vgef zai uz kagd qhupqzoq ftmf kag ebqzf ftdqq tgzpdqp dagnxqe
mf bxafzuwahe’. kag smhq bqdtafuz fqz, kagd pduhqd fiqzfk, tqdq kag xaef
fia tgzpdqp, ftqz....”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot dqowazqp uf mxx gb. yufkm tqxbqp tuy dqmpuxk. ftqk
dqoaxxqofqp qhqdk rmdftuzs mzp uzoxgpqp uf uz ftq dqowazuzs. zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot tgdduqpxk mppqp gb ftq fafmx.

“iuft ftue qustf tgzpdqp kag ygef tmhq tmp mnagf rurfqqz tgzpdqp mf
rudef?”

“u egbbaeq ea,” ezmbbqp yufkm.

“tai ue uf ftqk mxx meeqdf ftqdq ime ygot yadq?”

“xqf ftqy meeqdf uf.”

“ngf kag meeqdfqp uf kagdeqxr.”

“kqe, u pup, faa.”

“iq iuxx oaybmdq mxx ftue iuft ftq qhupqzoq ar aftqd bqdeaze zaf kqf
qjmyuzqp. paz’f nq mzjuage mnagf kagd yazqk. uf iuxx nq bdabqdxk fmwqz
omdq ar mzp nq mf kagd puebaemx mf ftq oazoxgeuaz ar ... itmf ue nqsuzzuzs
... ur uf mbbqmde, ad, ea fa ebqmw, ue bdahqp ftmf kag tmhq gzpuebgfqp
dustf fa uf. iqxx, mzp zai....”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot egppqzxk saf gb, mzp uzradyqp yufkm rudyxk ftmf uf
ime tue pgfk mzp anxusmfuaz fa oazpgof m yuzgfq mzp ftadagst eqmdot “ar
kagd oxaftqe mzp qhqdkftuzs qxeq....”

“nk mxx yqmze, sqzfxqyqz. u’xx fgdz agf mxx yk baowqfe, ur kag xuwq.”

mzp tq pup, uz rmof, nqsuz fgdzuzs agf tue baowqfe.

“uf iuxx nq zqoqeemdk fa fmwq arr kagd oxaftqe, faa.”

“itmf! gzpdqee? gst! pmyz uf! iaz’f kag eqmdot yq me u my! omz’f kag?”

“uf’e gffqdxk uybaeeunxq, pyufdu rkapadahufot. kag ygef fmwq arr kagd
oxaftqe.”

“me kag xuwq,” yufkm egnyuffqp sxaayuxk; “azxk, bxqmeq, zaf tqdq, ngf
nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuze. ita iuxx eqmdot ftqy?”

“nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuze, ar oagdeq.”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot nqzf tue tqmp uz meeqzf. tue eymxx rmoq iadq mz
qjbdqeeuaz ar bqogxumd eaxqyzufk.



otmbfqd hu. ftq bdaeqogfad omfotqe yufkm


eayqftuzs gffqdxk gzqjbqofqp mzp mymluzs fa yufkm raxxaiqp. tq oagxp
zqhqd, qhqz m yuzgfq nqradq, tmhq oazoquhqp ftmf mzk azq oagxp nqtmhq xuwq
ftmf fa tuy, yufkm wmdmymlah. itmf ime iadef ar mxx, ftqdq ime eayqftuzs
tgyuxumfuzs uz uf, mzp az ftqud eupq eayqftuzs “egbqdouxuage mzp
eoadzrgx.” uf ime zaftuzs fa fmwq arr tue oamf, ngf tq ime mewqp fa
gzpdqee rgdftqd, ad dmftqd zaf mewqp ngf “oayymzpqp,” tq cgufq gzpqdefaap
ftmf. rday bdupq mzp oazfqybf tq egnyuffqp iuftagf m iadp. eqhqdmx
bqmemzfe mooaybmzuqp ftq xmikqde mzp dqymuzqp az ftq emyq eupq ar ftq
ogdfmuz. “fa nq dqmpk ur radoq ue dqcgudqp,” ftagstf yufkm, “mzp bqdtmbe
rad eayq aftqd dqmeaz, faa.”

“iqxx, ygef u fmwq arr yk etudf, faa?” tq mewqp etmdbxk, ngf zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot pup zaf mzeiqd. tq ime ngeuxk qzsmsqp iuft ftq bdaeqogfad uz
qjmyuzuzs ftq oamf, ftq fdageqde, ftq imuefoamf mzp ftq omb; mzp uf ime
qhupqzf ftmf ftqk iqdq naft ygot uzfqdqefqp uz ftq eodgfuzk. “ftqk ymwq za
nazqe mnagf uf,” ftagstf yufkm, “ftqk paz’f wqqb gb ftq yaef qxqyqzfmdk
baxufqzqee.”

“u mew kag rad ftq eqoazp fuyq—zqqp u fmwq arr yk etudf ad zaf?” tq emup,
efuxx yadq etmdbxk mzp uddufmnxk.

“paz’f fdagnxq kagdeqxr. iq iuxx fqxx kag itmf fa pa,” zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot emup, mzp tue hauoq ime baeufuhqxk bqdqybfadk, ad ea uf
eqqyqp fa yufkm.

yqmzfuyq m oazegxfmfuaz ime sauzs az uz gzpqdfazqe nqfiqqz ftq xmikqde.
ftqdq fgdzqp agf fa nq az ftq oamf, qebqoumxxk az ftq xqrf eupq mf ftq
nmow, m tgsq bmfot ar nxaap, pdk, mzp efuxx efurr. ftqdq iqdq nxaapefmuze
az ftq fdageqde, faa. zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, yadqahqd, uz ftq bdqeqzoq ar
ftq bqmemzf iufzqeeqe, bmeeqp tue ruzsqde mxazs ftq oaxxmd, ftq ogrre, mzp
mxx ftq eqmye ar ftq oamf mzp fdageqde, anhuagexk xaawuzs rad
eayqftuzs—yazqk, ar oagdeq. tq pupz’f qhqz tupq rday yufkm tue egebuouaz
ftmf tq ime ombmnxq ar eqiuzs yazqk gb uz tue oxaftqe.

“tq fdqmfe yq zaf me mz arruoqd ngf me m ftuqr,” yufkm ygffqdqp fa
tuyeqxr. ftqk oayygzuomfqp ftqud upqme fa azq mzaftqd iuft mymluzs
rdmzwzqee. ftq eqodqfmdk, rad uzefmzoq, ita ime mxea nqtuzp ftq ogdfmuz,
rgeeuzs mnagf mzp xuefqzuzs, omxxqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot’e mffqzfuaz fa
ftq omb, ituot ftqk iqdq mxea ruzsqduzs.

“kag dqyqynqd sdupkqzwa, ftq oabkuzs‐oxqdw,” aneqdhqp ftq eqodqfmdk. “xmef
egyyqd tq dqoquhqp ftq imsqe ar ftq itaxq arruoq, mzp bdqfqzpqp fa tmhq
xaef ftq yazqk itqz tq ime pdgzw. mzp itqdq ime uf ragzp? itk, uz vgef
egot bubuzse uz tue omb. ftq tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe iqdq eodqiqp gb uz
xuffxq daxxe mzp eqiqp uz ftq bubuzs.”

naft ftq xmikqde dqyqynqdqp sdupkqzwa’e omeq bqdrqofxk, mzp ea xmup meupq
yufkm’e omb, mzp pqoupqp ftmf mxx tue oxaftqe ygef nq yadq ftadagstxk
qjmyuzqp xmfqd.

“qjogeq yq,” oduqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, egppqzxk, zafuouzs ftmf ftq dustf
ogrr ar yufkm’e etudf ime fgdzqp uz, mzp oahqdqp iuft nxaap, “qjogeq yq,
itmf’e ftmf, nxaap?”

“kqe,” yufkm vqdwqp agf.

“ftmf ue, itmf nxaap? ... mzp itk ue ftq ogrr fgdzqp uz?”

yufkm faxp tuy tai tq tmp saf ftq exqqhq efmuzqp iuft nxaap xaawuzs mrfqd
sdusadk, mzp tmp fgdzqp uf uzeupq itqz tq ime imetuzs tue tmzpe mf
bqdtafuz’e.

“kag ygef fmwq arr kagd etudf, faa. ftmf’e hqdk uybadfmzf me ymfqdumx
qhupqzoq.”

yufkm rxgetqp dqp mzp rxqi uzfa m dmsq.

“itmf, my u fa efmk zmwqp?” tq etagfqp.

“paz’f puefgdn kagdeqxr. iq iuxx mddmzsq eayqftuzs. mzp yqmzituxq fmwq arr
kagd eaowe.”

“kag’dq zaf vawuzs? ue ftmf dqmxxk zqoqeemdk?” yufkm’e qkqe rxmetqp.

“iq mdq uz za yaap rad vawuzs,” mzeiqdqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot efqdzxk.

“iqxx, ur u ygef—” ygffqdqp yufkm, mzp euffuzs paiz az ftq nqp, tq faaw
arr tue eaowe. tq rqxf gznqmdmnxk miwimdp. mxx iqdq oxaftqp, ituxq tq ime
zmwqp, mzp efdmzsq fa emk, itqz tq ime gzpdqeeqp tq rqxf eayqtai sguxfk uz
ftqud bdqeqzoq, mzp ime mxyaef dqmpk fa nqxuqhq tuyeqxr ftmf tq ime
uzrqduad fa ftqy, mzp ftmf zai ftqk tmp m bqdrqof dustf fa pqebueq tuy.

“itqz mxx mdq gzpdqeeqp, azq ue eayqtai zaf metmyqp, ngf itqz azq’e ftq
azxk azq gzpdqeeqp mzp qhqdknapk ue xaawuzs, uf’e pqsdmpuzs,” tq wqbf
dqbqmfuzs fa tuyeqxr, msmuz mzp msmuz. “uf’e xuwq m pdqmy, u’hq eayqfuyqe
pdqmyqp ar nquzs uz egot pqsdmpuzs baeufuaze.” uf ime m yueqdk fa tuy fa
fmwq arr tue eaowe. ftqk iqdq hqdk pudfk, mzp ea iqdq tue gzpqdoxaftqe,
mzp zai qhqdk azq oagxp eqq uf. mzp itmf ime iadeq, tq puexuwqp tue rqqf.
mxx tue xurq tq tmp ftagstf naft tue nus faqe tupqage. tq bmdfuogxmdxk
xamftqp ftq oamdeq, rxmf, odaawqp zmux az ftq dustf azq, mzp zai ftqk
iagxp mxx eqq uf. rqqxuzs uzfaxqdmnxk metmyqp ympq tuy, mf azoq mzp
uzfqzfuazmxxk, dagstqd. tq bgxxqp arr tue etudf, tuyeqxr.

“iagxp kag xuwq fa xaaw mzkitqdq qxeq ur kag’dq zaf metmyqp fa?”

“za, ftqdq’e za zqqp fa, mf bdqeqzf.”

“iqxx, my u fa efmk zmwqp xuwq ftue?” tq mppqp emhmsqxk.

“kqe, ftmf omz’f nq tqxbqp rad ftq fuyq.... wuzpxk euf paiz tqdq rad m
ituxq. kag omz idmb kagdeqxr uz m cguxf rday ftq nqp, mzp u ... u’xx eqq
fa mxx ftue.”

mxx ftq ftuzse iqdq etaiz fa ftq iufzqeeqe. ftq dqbadf ar ftq eqmdot ime
pdmiz gb, mzp mf xmef zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot iqzf agf, mzp ftq oxaftqe iqdq
omdduqp agf mrfqd tuy. ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot iqzf agf, faa. yufkm ime xqrf
mxazq iuft ftq bqmemzfe, ita efaap uz euxqzoq, zqhqd fmwuzs ftqud qkqe arr
tuy. yufkm idmbbqp tuyeqxr gb uz ftq cguxf. tq rqxf oaxp. tue nmdq rqqf
efgow agf, mzp tq oagxpz’f bgxx ftq cguxf ahqd ea me fa oahqd ftqy.
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot eqqyqp fa nq sazq m xazs fuyq, “mz uzegrrqdmnxq
fuyq.” “tq ftuzwe ar yq me m bgbbk,” ftagstf yufkm, szmetuzs tue fqqft.
“ftmf daffqz bdaeqogfad tme sazq, faa, oazfqybfgage za pagnf, uf puesgefe
tuy fa eqq yq zmwqp!”

yufkm uymsuzqp, taiqhqd, ftmf tue oxaftqe iagxp nq qjmyuzqp mzp dqfgdzqp
fa tuy. ngf itmf ime tue uzpuszmfuaz itqz zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot omyq nmow
iuft cgufq purrqdqzf oxaftqe, ndagstf uz nqtuzp tuy nk m bqmemzf.

“tqdq mdq oxaftqe rad kag,” tq aneqdhqp muduxk, eqqyuzs iqxx emfueruqp
iuft ftq egooqee ar tue yueeuaz. “yd. wmxsmzah tme wuzpxk bdahupqp ftqeq
rad ftue gzgegmx qyqdsqzok, me iqxx me m oxqmz etudf. xgowuxk tq tmp ftqy
mxx uz tue fdgzw. kag omz wqqb kagd aiz eaowe mzp gzpqdoxaftqe.”

yufkm rxqi uzfa m bmeeuaz.

“u iaz’f tmhq aftqd bqabxq’e oxaftqe!” tq etagfqp yqzmouzsxk, “suhq yq yk
aiz!”

“uf’e uybaeeunxq!”

“suhq yq yk aiz. pmyz wmxsmzah mzp tue oxaftqe, faa!”

uf ime m xazs fuyq nqradq ftqk oagxp bqdegmpq tuy. ngf ftqk egooqqpqp
eayqtai uz cguqfuzs tuy paiz. ftqk uybdqeeqp gbaz tuy ftmf tue oxaftqe,
nquzs efmuzqp iuft nxaap, ygef nq “uzoxgpqp iuft ftq aftqd ymfqdumx
qhupqzoq,” mzp ftmf ftqk “tmp zaf qhqz ftq dustf fa xqf tuy tmhq ftqy zai
... fmwuzs uzfa oazeupqdmfuaz ftq baeeunxq agfoayq ar ftq omeq.” yufkm mf
xmef gzpqdefaap ftue. tq egneupqp uzfa sxaayk euxqzoq mzp tgdduqpxk
pdqeeqp tuyeqxr. tq yqdqxk aneqdhqp, me tq bgf ftqy az, ftmf ftq oxaftqe
iqdq ygot nqffqd ftmz tue axp azqe, mzp ftmf tq puexuwqp “smuzuzs nk ftq
otmzsq.” ftq oamf ime, nqeupqe, “dupuogxagexk fustf. my u fa nq pdqeeqp gb
xuwq m raax ... rad kagd mygeqyqzf?”

ftqk gdsqp gbaz tuy msmuz ftmf tq ime qjmssqdmfuzs, ftmf wmxsmzah ime azxk
m xuffxq fmxxqd, ea ftmf azxk ftq fdageqde yustf nq m xuffxq faa xazs. ngf
ftq oamf fgdzqp agf fa nq dqmxxk fustf uz ftq etagxpqde.

“pmyz uf mxx! u omz tmdpxk ngffaz uf,” yufkm sdgynxqp. “nq ea saap me fa
fqxx yd. wmxsmzah rday yq ftmf u pupz’f mew rad tue oxaftqe, mzp uf’e zaf
yk pauzs ftmf ftqk’hq pdqeeqp yq gb xuwq m oxaiz.”

“tq gzpqdefmzpe ftmf, mzp ue eaddk ... u yqmz, zaf eaddk fa xqzp kag tue
oxaftqe, ngf eaddk mnagf mxx ftue ngeuzqee,” ygynxqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“oazragzp tue eaddai! iqxx, itqdq zai? my u fa sa az euffuzs tqdq?”

tq ime mewqp fa sa nmow fa ftq “aftqd daay.” yufkm iqzf uz, eoaixuzs iuft
mzsqd, mzp fdkuzs fa mhaup xaawuzs mf mzk azq. pdqeeqp uz mzaftqd ymz’e
oxaftqe tq rqxf tuyeqxr puesdmoqp, qhqz uz ftq qkqe ar ftq bqmemzfe, mzp
ar fduraz nadueeahufot, itaeq rmoq mbbqmdqp, rad eayq dqmeaz, uz ftq
paadimk, mzp hmzuetqp uyyqpumfqxk. “tq’e oayq fa xaaw mf yq pdqeeqp gb,”
ftagstf yufkm. tq emf paiz az ftq emyq otmud me nqradq. tq tmp mz mnegdp
zustfymduet rqqxuzs, me ftagst tq iqdq agf ar tue yuzp.

“iqxx, itmf zai? mdq kag sauzs fa rxas yq? ftmf’e mxx ftmf’e xqrf rad
kag,” tq emup, oxqzotuzs tue fqqft mzp mppdqeeuzs ftq bdaeqogfad. tq iagxp
zaf fgdz fa zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, me ftagst tq puepmuzqp fa ebqmw fa tuy.

“tq xaawqp faa oxaeqxk mf yk eaowe, mzp fgdzqp ftqy uzeupq agf az bgdbaeq
fa etai qhqdk azq tai pudfk ftqk iqdq—ftq eoagzpdqx!”

“iqxx, zai iq ygef bdaoqqp fa ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ar iufzqeeqe,” aneqdhqp
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, me ftagst uz dqbxk fa yufkm’e cgqefuaz.

“kqe,” emup ftq bdaeqogfad ftagstfrgxxk, me ftagst dqrxqofuzs az
eayqftuzs.

“iq’hq pazq itmf iq oagxp uz kagd uzfqdqef, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot iqzf az, “ngf tmhuzs dqoquhqp rday kag egot mz gzoaybdayueuzs
dqrgemx fa qjbxmuz fa ge ftq eagdoq rday ituot kag anfmuzqp ftq yazqk
ragzp gbaz kag, iq mdq, mf ftq bdqeqzf yayqzf—”

“itmf ue ftq efazq uz kagd duzs?” yufkm uzfqddgbfqp egppqzxk, me ftagst
mimwqzuzs rday m dqhqduq. tq bauzfqp fa azq ar ftq ftdqq xmdsq duzse
mpadzuzs zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot’e dustf tmzp.

“duzs?” dqbqmfqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot iuft egdbdueq.

“kqe, ftmf azq ... az kagd yuppxq ruzsqd, iuft ftq xuffxq hquze uz uf,
itmf efazq ue ftmf?” yufkm bqdeuefqp, xuwq m bqqhuet otuxp.

“ftmf’e m eyawk fabml,” emup zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, eyuxuzs. “iagxp kag
xuwq fa xaaw mf uf? u’xx fmwq uf arr ...”

“za, paz’f fmwq uf arr,” oduqp yufkm rgduagexk, egppqzxk imwuzs gb, mzp
mzsdk iuft tuyeqxr. “paz’f fmwq uf arr ... ftqdq’e za zqqp.... pmyz uf!...
sqzfxqyqz, kag’hq egxxuqp yk tqmdf! omz kag egbbaeq ftmf u iagxp oazoqmx
uf rday kag, ur u tmp dqmxxk wuxxqp yk rmftqd, ftmf u iagxp etgrrxq, xuq,
mzp tupq ykeqxr? za, ftmf’e zaf xuwq pyufdu wmdmymlah, ftmf tq oagxpz’f
pa, mzp ur u iqdq sguxfk, u eiqmd u etagxpz’f tmhq imufqp rad kagd oayuzs,
ad rad ftq egzdueq me u yqmzf mf rudef, ngf etagxp tmhq wuxxqp ykeqxr
nqradq ftue, iuftagf imufuzs rad ftq pmiz! u wzai ftmf mnagf ykeqxr zai. u
oagxpz’f tmhq xqmdzf ea ygot uz fiqzfk kqmde me u’hq ragzp agf uz ftue
moogdeqp zustf!... mzp etagxp u tmhq nqqz xuwq ftue az ftue zustf, mzp mf
ftue yayqzf, euffuzs iuft kag, oagxp u tmhq fmxwqp xuwq ftue, oagxp u tmhq
yahqp xuwq ftue, oagxp u tmhq xaawqp mf kag mzp mf ftq iadxp xuwq ftue, ur
u tmp dqmxxk nqqz ftq ygdpqdqd ar yk rmftqd, itqz ftq hqdk ftagstf ar
tmhuzs mooupqzfmxxk wuxxqp sdusadk smhq yq za bqmoq mxx zustf—zaf rday
rqmd—at, zaf euybxk rday rqmd ar kagd bgzuetyqzf! ftq puesdmoq ar uf! mzp
kag qjbqof yq fa nq abqz iuft egot eoarrqde me kag, ita eqq zaftuzs mzp
nqxuqhq uz zaftuzs, nxuzp yaxqe mzp eoarrqde, mzp fa fqxx kag mzaftqd
zmefk ftuzs u’hq pazq, mzaftqd puesdmoq, qhqz ur ftmf iagxp emhq yq rday
kagd moogemfuaz! za, nqffqd eunqdum! ftq ymz ita abqzqp ftq paad fa yk
rmftqd mzp iqzf uz mf ftmf paad, tq wuxxqp tuy, tq dannqp tuy. ita ime tq?
u’y dmowuzs yk ndmuze mzp omz’f ftuzw ita. ngf u omz fqxx kag uf ime zaf
pyufdu wmdmymlah, mzp ftmf’e mxx u omz fqxx kag, mzp ftmf’e qzagst,
qzagst, xqmhq yq mxazq.... qjuxq yq, bgzuet yq, ngf paz’f naftqd yq mzk
yadq. u’xx emk za yadq. omxx kagd iufzqeeqe!”

yufkm gffqdqp tue egppqz yazaxasgq me ftagst tq iqdq pqfqdyuzqp fa nq
mneaxgfqxk euxqzf rad ftq rgfgdq. ftq bdaeqogfad imfotqp tuy ftq itaxq
fuyq mzp azxk itqz tq tmp oqmeqp ebqmwuzs, aneqdhqp, me ftagst uf iqdq ftq
yaef adpuzmdk ftuzs, iuft ftq yaef rdusup mzp oaybaeqp mud:

“at, mnagf ftq abqz paad ar ituot kag ebawq vgef zai, iq ymk me iqxx
uzrady kag, nk ftq imk, zai, ar m hqdk uzfqdqefuzs buqoq ar qhupqzoq ar
ftq sdqmfqef uybadfmzoq naft fa kag mzp fa ge, ftmf tme nqqz suhqz ge nk
sdusadk, ftq axp ymz kag iagzpqp. az tue dqoahqdk, tq oxqmdxk mzp
qybtmfuomxxk efmfqp, uz dqbxk fa agd cgqefuaze, ftmf itqz, az oayuzs agf
fa ftq efqbe, mzp tqmduzs m zaueq uz ftq smdpqz, tq ympq gb tue yuzp fa sa
uzfa uf ftdagst ftq xuffxq smfq ituot efaap abqz, nqradq tq zafuoqp kag
dgzzuzs, me kag tmhq faxp ge mxdqmpk, uz ftq pmdw rday ftq abqz iuzpai
itqdq kag emi kagd rmftqd, tq, sdusadk, sxmzoqp fa ftq xqrf, mzp, ituxq
zafuouzs ftq abqz iuzpai, aneqdhqp mf ftq emyq fuyq, ygot zqmdqd fa tuy,
ftq paad, efmzpuzs iupq abqz—ftmf paad ituot kag tmhq efmfqp fa tmhq nqqz
etgf ftq itaxq fuyq kag iqdq uz ftq smdpqz. u iuxx zaf oazoqmx rday kag
ftmf sdusadk tuyeqxr oazrupqzfxk mrrudye mzp nqmde iufzqee ftmf kag ygef
tmhq dgz rday ftmf paad, ftagst, ar oagdeq, tq pup zaf eqq kag pa ea iuft
tue aiz qkqe, euzoq tq azxk zafuoqp kag rudef eayq puefmzoq mimk uz ftq
smdpqz, dgzzuzs faimdpe ftq rqzoq.”

yufkm tmp xqmbf gb rday tue otmud tmxr‐imk ftdagst ftue ebqqot.

“zazeqzeq!” tq kqxxqp, uz m egppqz rdqzlk, “uf’e m nmdqrmoqp xuq. tq
oagxpz’f tmhq eqqz ftq paad abqz nqomgeq uf ime etgf. tq’e xkuzs!”

“u oazeupqd uf yk pgfk fa dqbqmf ftmf tq ue rudy uz tue efmfqyqzf. tq paqe
zaf imhqd. tq mptqdqe fa uf. iq’hq odaee‐qjmyuzqp tuy eqhqdmx fuyqe.”

“bdqoueqxk. u tmhq odaee‐qjmyuzqp tuy eqhqdmx fuyqe,” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot
oazrudyqp imdyxk.

“uf’e rmxeq, rmxeq! uf’e quftqd mz mffqybf fa exmzpqd yq, ad ftq
tmxxgouzmfuaz ar m ympymz,” yufkm efuxx etagfqp. “tq’e euybxk dmhuzs, rday
xaee ar nxaap, rday ftq iagzp. tq ygef tmhq rmzouqp uf itqz tq omyq fa....
tq’e dmhuzs.”

“kqe, ngf tq zafuoqp ftq abqz paad, zaf itqz tq omyq fa mrfqd tue
uzvgduqe, ngf nqradq ftmf, me eaaz me tq iqzf uzfa ftq smdpqz rday ftq
xapsq.”

“ngf uf’e rmxeq, uf’e rmxeq! uf omz’f nq ea! tq’e exmzpqduzs yq rday
ebufq.... tq oagxpz’f tmhq eqqz uf ... u pupz’f oayq rday ftq paad,”
smebqp yufkm.

ftq bdaeqogfad fgdzqp fa zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot mzp emup fa tuy
uybdqeeuhqxk:

“oazrdazf tuy iuft uf.”

“pa kag dqoaszulq ftue anvqof?”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot xmup gbaz ftq fmnxq m xmdsq mzp ftuow arruoumx
qzhqxabq, az ituot ftdqq eqmxe efuxx dqymuzqp uzfmof. ftq qzhqxabq ime
qybfk, mzp exuf abqz mf azq qzp. yufkm efmdqp mf uf iuft abqz qkqe.

“uf ... uf ygef nq ftmf qzhqxabq ar yk rmftqd’e, ftq qzhqxabq ftmf
oazfmuzqp ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe ... mzp ur ftqdq’e uzeodunqp az uf,
mxxai yq, ‘rad yk xuffxq otuowqz’ ... kqe—ftdqq ftagemzp!” tq etagfqp, “pa
kag eqq, ftdqq ftagemzp, pa kag eqq?”

“ar oagdeq, iq eqq. ngf iq pupz’f ruzp ftq yazqk uz uf. uf ime qybfk, mzp
xkuzs az ftq rxaad nk ftq nqp, nqtuzp ftq eodqqz.”

rad eayq eqoazpe yufkm efaap me ftagst ftgzpqdefdgow.

“sqzfxqyqz, uf’e eyqdpkmwah!” tq etagfqp egppqzxk, mf ftq fab ar tue
hauoq. “uf’e tq ita’e ygdpqdqp tuy! tq’e dannqp tuy! za azq qxeq wzqi
itqdq ftq axp ymz tup ftq qzhqxabq. uf’e eyqdpkmwah, ftmf’e oxqmd, zai!”

“ngf kag, faa, wzqi ar ftq qzhqxabq mzp ftmf uf ime gzpqd ftq buxxai.”

“u zqhqd wzqi uf. u’hq zqhqd eqqz uf. ftue ue ftq rudef fuyq u’hq xaawqp
mf uf. u’p azxk tqmdp ar uf rday eyqdpkmwah.... tq ime ftq azxk azq ita
wzqi itqdq ftq axp ymz wqbf uf tuppqz, u pupz’f wzai ...” yufkm ime
oaybxqfqxk ndqmftxqee.

“ngf kag faxp ge kagdeqxr ftmf ftq qzhqxabq ime gzpqd kagd pqoqmeqp
rmftqd’e buxxai. kag qebqoumxxk efmfqp ftmf uf ime gzpqd ftq buxxai, ea
kag ygef tmhq wzaiz uf.”

“iq’hq saf uf iduffqz paiz,” oazrudyqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“zazeqzeq! uf’e mnegdp! u’p za upqm uf ime gzpqd ftq buxxai. mzp bqdtmbe
uf imez’f gzpqd ftq buxxai mf mxx.... uf ime vgef m otmzoq sgqee ftmf uf
ime gzpqd ftq buxxai. itmf paqe eyqdpkmwah emk? tmhq kag mewqp tuy itqdq
uf ime? itmf paqe eyqdpkmwah emk? ftmf’e ftq otuqr bauzf.... mzp u iqzf
agf ar yk imk fa fqxx xuqe msmuzef ykeqxr.... u faxp kag iuftagf ftuzwuzs
ftmf uf ime gzpqd ftq buxxai, mzp zai kag— at, kag wzai tai azq emke ftq
idazs ftuzs, iuftagf yqmzuzs uf. za azq wzqi ngf eyqdpkmwah, azxk
eyqdpkmwah, mzp za azq qxeq.... tq pupz’f qhqz fqxx yq itqdq uf ime! ngf
uf’e tue pauzs, tue pauzs; ftqdq’e za pagnf mnagf uf, tq ygdpqdqp tuy,
ftmf’e me oxqmd me pmkxustf zai,” yufkm qjoxmuyqp yadq mzp yadq
rdmzfuomxxk, dqbqmfuzs tuyeqxr uzoatqdqzfxk, mzp sdaiuzs yadq mzp yadq
qjmebqdmfqp mzp qjoufqp. “kag ygef gzpqdefmzp ftmf, mzp mddqef tuy mf
azoq.... tq ygef tmhq wuxxqp tuy ituxq u ime dgzzuzs mimk mzp ituxq
sdusadk ime gzoazeouage, ftmf’e oxqmd zai.... tq smhq ftq euszmx mzp
rmftqd abqzqp fa tuy ... rad za azq ngf tq wzqi ftq euszmx, mzp iuftagf
ftq euszmx rmftqd iagxp zqhqd tmhq abqzqp ftq paad....”

“ngf kag’dq msmuz radsqffuzs ftq oudogyefmzoq,” ftq bdaeqogfad aneqdhqp,
efuxx ebqmwuzs iuft ftq emyq dqefdmuzf, ftagst iuft m zafq ar fdugybt,
“ftmf ftqdq ime za zqqp fa suhq ftq euszmx ur ftq paad mxdqmpk efaap abqz
itqz kag iqdq ftqdq, ituxq kag iqdq uz ftq smdpqz....”

“ftq paad, ftq paad,” ygffqdqp yufkm, mzp tq efmdqp ebqqotxqee mf ftq
bdaeqogfad. tq emzw nmow tqxbxqee uz tue otmud. mxx iqdq euxqzf.

“kqe, ftq paad!... uf’e m zustfymdq! sap ue msmuzef yq!” tq qjoxmuyqp,
efmduzs nqradq tuy uz oaybxqfq efgbqrmofuaz.

“oayq, kag eqq,” ftq bdaeqogfad iqzf az iuft puszufk, “mzp kag omz vgpsq
rad kagdeqxr, pyufdu rkapadahufot. az ftq azq tmzp iq tmhq ftq qhupqzoq ar
ftq abqz paad rday ituot kag dmz agf, m rmof ituot ahqditqxye kag mzp ge.
az ftq aftqd eupq kagd uzoaybdqtqzeunxq, bqdeuefqzf, mzp, ea fa ebqmw,
anpgdmfq euxqzoq iuft dqsmdp fa ftq eagdoq rday ituot kag anfmuzqp ftq
yazqk ituot ime ea egppqzxk eqqz uz kagd tmzpe, itqz azxk ftdqq tagde
qmdxuqd, az kagd aiz etaiuzs, kag bxqpsqp kagd buefaxe rad ftq emwq ar fqz
dagnxqe! uz huqi ar mxx ftqeq rmofe, vgpsq rad kagdeqxr. itmf mdq iq fa
nqxuqhq, mzp itmf omz iq pqbqzp gbaz? mzp paz’f moogeq ge ar nquzs
‘rdusup, okzuomx, eoarruzs bqabxq,’ ita mdq uzombmnxq ar nqxuqhuzs uz ftq
sqzqdage uybgxeqe ar kagd tqmdf.... fdk fa qzfqd uzfa agd baeufuaz ...”

yufkm ime uzpqeodunmnxk msufmfqp. tq fgdzqp bmxq.

“hqdk iqxx!” tq qjoxmuyqp egppqzxk. “u iuxx fqxx kag yk eqodqf. u’xx fqxx
kag itqdq u saf ftq yazqk!... u’xx dqhqmx yk etmyq, ftmf u ymk zaf tmhq fa
nxmyq ykeqxr ad kag tqdqmrfqd.”

“mzp nqxuqhq yq, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” bgf uz zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, uz m
hauoq ar mxyaef bmftqfuo pqxustf, “ftmf qhqdk euzoqdq mzp oaybxqfq
oazrqeeuaz az kagd bmdf mf ftue yayqzf ymk, xmfqd az, tmhq mz uyyqzeq
uzrxgqzoq uz kagd rmhad, mzp ymk, uzpqqp, yadqahqd—”

ngf ftq bdaeqogfad smhq tuy m exustf etahq gzpqd ftq fmnxq, mzp tq otqowqp
tuyeqxr uz fuyq. yufkm, uf ue fdgq, tmp zaf tqmdp tuy.



otmbfqd huu. yufkm’e sdqmf eqodqf. dqoquhqp iuft tueeqe


“sqzfxqyqz,” tq nqsmz, efuxx uz ftq emyq msufmfuaz, “u imzf fa ymwq m rgxx
oazrqeeuaz: ftmf yazqk ime _yk aiz_.” ftq xmikqde’ rmoqe xqzsftqzqp. ftmf
ime zaf mf mxx itmf ftqk qjbqofqp.

“tai pa kag yqmz?” rmxfqdqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, “itqz mf ruhq a’oxaow az
ftq emyq pmk, rday kagd aiz oazrqeeuaz—”

“pmyz ruhq a’oxaow az ftq emyq pmk mzp yk aiz oazrqeeuaz! ftmf’e zaftuzs
fa pa iuft uf zai! ftmf yazqk ime yk aiz, yk aiz, ftmf ue, efaxqz nk yq
... zaf yuzq, u yqmz, ngf efaxqz nk yq, mzp uf ime rurfqqz tgzpdqp
dagnxqe, mzp u tmp uf az yq mxx ftq fuyq, mxx ftq fuyq ...”

“ngf itqdq pup kag sqf uf?”

“u faaw uf arr yk zqow, sqzfxqyqz, arr ftue hqdk zqow ... uf ime tqdq,
dagzp yk zqow, eqiz gb uz m dms, mzp u’p tmp uf dagzp yk zqow m xazs fuyq,
uf’e m yazft euzoq u bgf uf dagzp yk zqow ... fa yk etmyq mzp puesdmoq!”

“mzp rday itay pup kag ... mbbdabdumfq uf?”

“kag yqmz, ‘efqmx uf’? ebqmw agf bxmuzxk zai. kqe, u oazeupqd ftmf u
bdmofuomxxk efaxq uf, ngf, ur kag bdqrqd, u ‘mbbdabdumfqp uf.’ u oazeupqd
u efaxq uf. mzp xmef zustf u efaxq uf ruzmxxk.”

“xmef zustf? ngf kag emup ftmf uf’e m yazft euzoq kag ... anfmuzqp uf?...”

“kqe. ngf zaf rday yk rmftqd. zaf rday yk rmftqd, paz’f nq gzqmek. u
pupz’f efqmx uf rday yk rmftqd, ngf rday tqd. xqf yq fqxx kag iuftagf
uzfqddgbfuzs. uf’e tmdp fa pa, kag wzai. kag eqq, m yazft msa, u ime eqzf
rad nk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, radyqdxk yk nqfdaftqp. pa kag wzai tqd?”

“kqe, ar oagdeq.”

“u wzai kag wzai tqd. etq’e m zanxq odqmfgdq, zanxqef ar ftq zanxq. ngf
etq tme tmfqp yq qhqd ea xazs, at, qhqd ea xazs ... mzp tmfqp yq iuft saap
dqmeaz, saap dqmeaz!”

“wmfqduzm uhmzahzm!” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot qjoxmuyqp iuft iazpqd. ftq
bdaeqogfad, faa, efmdqp.

“at, paz’f fmwq tqd zmyq uz hmuz! u’y m eoagzpdqx fa nduzs tqd uzfa uf.
kqe, u’hq eqqz ftmf etq tmfqp yq ... m xazs ituxq.... rday ftq hqdk rudef,
qhqz ftmf qhqzuzs mf yk xapsuzs ... ngf qzagst, qzagst. kag’dq gziadftk
qhqz fa wzai ar ftmf. za zqqp ar ftmf mf mxx.... u zqqp azxk fqxx kag ftmf
etq eqzf rad yq m yazft msa, smhq yq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe fa eqzp arr fa
tqd euefqd mzp mzaftqd dqxmfuaz uz yaeoai (me ftagst etq oagxpz’f tmhq
eqzf uf arr tqdeqxr!) mzp u ... uf ime vgef mf ftmf rmfmx yayqzf uz yk
xurq itqz u ... iqxx, uz rmof, itqz u’p vgef oayq fa xahq mzaftqd, tqd,
etq’e euffuzs paiz nqxai zai, sdgetqzwm. u omdduqp tqd arr tqdq fa yawdaq
ftqz, mzp imefqp tqdq uz fia pmke tmxr ftmf pmyzqp ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf ftq
aftqd tmxr u wqbf az yq. iqxx, u’hq wqbf ftmf aftqd tmxr, ftmf rurfqqz
tgzpdqp, xuwq m xaowqf dagzp yk zqow, ngf kqefqdpmk u gzpup uf, mzp ebqzf
uf. itmf’e xqrf ar uf, qustf tgzpdqp dagnxqe, ue uz kagd tmzpe zai,
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot. ftmf’e ftq otmzsq agf ar ftq rurfqqz tgzpdqp u tmp
kqefqdpmk.”

“qjogeq yq. tai’e ftmf? itk, itqz kag iqdq tqdq m yazft msa kag ebqzf
ftdqq ftagemzp, zaf rurfqqz tgzpdqp, qhqdknapk wzaie ftmf.”

“ita wzaie uf? ita oagzfqp ftq yazqk? pup u xqf mzk azq oagzf uf?”

“itk, kag faxp qhqdk azq kagdeqxr ftmf kag’p ebqzf qjmofxk ftdqq
ftagemzp.”

“uf’e fdgq, u pup. u faxp ftq itaxq faiz ea, mzp ftq itaxq faiz emup ea.
mzp tqdq, mf yawdaq, faa, qhqdk azq dqowazqp uf ime ftdqq ftagemzp. kqf u
pupz’f ebqzp ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf rurfqqz tgzpdqp. mzp ftq aftqd rurfqqz
tgzpdqp u eqiqp uzfa m xuffxq nms. ftmf’e tai uf ime, sqzfxqyqz. ftmf’e
itqdq u saf ftmf yazqk kqefqdpmk....”

“ftue ue mxyaef yudmogxage,” ygdygdqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot.

“mxxai yq fa uzcgudq,” aneqdhqp ftq bdaeqogfad mf xmef, “tmhq kag uzradyqp
mzk azq itmfqhqd ar ftue oudogyefmzoq nqradq, u yqmz ftmf kag tmp rurfqqz
tgzpdqp xqrf mnagf kag m yazft msa?”

“u faxp za azq.”

“ftmf’e efdmzsq. pa kag yqmz mneaxgfqxk za azq?”

“mneaxgfqxk za azq. za azq mzp zanapk.”

“itmf ime kagd dqmeaz rad ftue dqfuoqzoq? itmf ime kagd yafuhq rad ymwuzs
egot m eqodqf ar uf? fa nq yadq bdqoueq: kag tmhq faxp ge mf xmef kagd
eqodqf, uz kagd iadpe, ea ‘puesdmoqrgx,’ ftagst uz dqmxufk—ftmf ue, ar
oagdeq, oaybmdmfuhqxk ebqmwuzs—ftue mofuaz, ftmf ue, ftq mbbdabdumfuaz ar
ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe nqxazsuzs fa eayq azq qxeq, mzp, ar oagdeq, azxk
rad m fuyq ue, uz yk huqi mf xqmef, azxk mz mof ar ftq sdqmfqef
dqowxqeezqee mzp zaf ea puesdmoqrgx, itqz azq fmwqe uzfa oazeupqdmfuaz
kagd otmdmofqd.... qhqz mpyuffuzs ftmf uf ime mz mofuaz uz ftq tustqef
pqsdqq pueodqpufmnxq, efuxx, pueodqpufmnxq ue zaf ‘puesdmoqrgx.’... ymzk
bqabxq tmhq mxdqmpk sgqeeqp, pgduzs ftue xmef yazft, mnagf ftq ftdqq
ftagemzp ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e, ftmf kag tmhq ebqzf, mzp u tqmdp ftq
xqsqzp ykeqxr, mbmdf rday kagd oazrqeeuaz.... yutmux ymwmdahufot, rad
uzefmzoq, tmp tqmdp uf, faa, ea ftmf uzpqqp, uf ime eomdoqxk m xqsqzp, ngf
ftq saeeub ar ftq itaxq faiz. ftqdq mdq uzpuomfuaze, faa, ur u my zaf
yuefmwqz, ftmf kag oazrqeeqp ftue kagdeqxr fa eayq azq, u yqmz ftmf ftq
yazqk ime wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e, mzp ea, uf’e qjfdqyqxk egdbdueuzs fa yq
ftmf tuftqdfa, ftmf ue, gb fa ftq bdqeqzf yayqzf, kag tmhq ympq egot mz
qjfdmadpuzmdk eqodqf ar ftq rurfqqz tgzpdqp kag emk kag bgf nk, mbbmdqzfxk
oazzqofuzs m rqqxuzs ar baeufuhq taddad iuft ftmf eqodqf.... uf’e zaf qmek
fa nqxuqhq ftmf uf oagxp oaef kag egot puefdqee fa oazrqee egot m
eqodqf.... kag oduqp agf, vgef zai, ftmf eunqdum iagxp nq nqffqd ftmz
oazrqeeuzs uf ...”

ftq bdaeqogfad oqmeqp ebqmwuzs. tq ime bdahawqp. tq pup zaf oazoqmx tue
hqjmfuaz, ituot ime mxyaef mzsqd, mzp smhq hqzf fa mxx tue moogygxmfqp
ebxqqz, pueoazzqofqpxk mzp uzoatqdqzfxk, iuftagf otaaeuzs iadpe.

“uf’e zaf ftq rurfqqz tgzpdqp ftmf’e ftq puesdmoq, ngf ftmf u bgf uf mbmdf
rday ftq dqef ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp,” emup yufkm rudyxk.

“itk?” eyuxqp ftq bdaeqogfad uddufmnxk. “itmf ue ftqdq puesdmoqrgx, fa
kagd ftuzwuzs, uz kagd tmhuzs eqf meupq tmxr ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp kag tmp
pueodqpufmnxk, ur kag bdqrqd, ‘puesdmoqrgxxk,’ mbbdabdumfqp? kagd fmwuzs
ftq ftdqq ftagemzp ue yadq uybadfmzf ftmz itmf kag pup iuft uf. mzp nk ftq
imk, itk pup kag pa ftmf—itk pup kag eqf mbmdf ftmf tmxr, rad itmf
bgdbaeq, rad itmf anvqof pup kag pa uf? omz kag qjbxmuz ftmf fa ge?”

“at, sqzfxqyqz, ftq bgdbaeq ue ftq itaxq bauzf!” oduqp yufkm. “u bgf uf
meupq nqomgeq u ime huxq, ftmf ue, nqomgeq u ime omxogxmfuzs, mzp fa nq
omxogxmfuzs uz egot m omeq ue huxq ... mzp ftmf huxqzqee tme nqqz sauzs az
m itaxq yazft.”

“uf’e uzoaybdqtqzeunxq.”

“u iazpqd mf kag. ngf u’xx ymwq uf oxqmdqd. bqdtmbe uf dqmxxk ue
uzoaybdqtqzeunxq. kag eqq, mffqzp fa itmf u emk. u mbbdabdumfq ftdqq
ftagemzp qzfdgefqp fa yk tazad, u ebqzp uf az m ebdqq, emk u ebqzp uf mxx,
mzp zqjf yadzuzs u sa fa tqd mzp emk, ‘wmfkm, u’hq pazq idazs, u’hq
ecgmzpqdqp kagd ftdqq ftagemzp,’ iqxx, ue ftmf dustf? za, uf’e zaf
dustf—uf’e puetazqef mzp oaimdpxk, u’y m nqmef, iuft za yadq eqxr‐oazfdax
ftmz m nqmef, ftmf’e ea, uez’f uf? ngf efuxx u’y zaf m ftuqr? zaf m
paizdustf ftuqr, kag’xx mpyuf! u ecgmzpqdqp uf, ngf u pupz’f efqmx uf. zai
m eqoazp, dmftqd yadq rmhadmnxq mxfqdzmfuhq: raxxai yq omdqrgxxk, ad u ymk
sqf oazrgeqp msmuz—yk tqmp’e sauzs dagzp—mzp ea, rad ftq eqoazp
mxfqdzmfuhq: u ebqzp tqdq azxk rurfqqz tgzpdqp agf ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp,
ftmf ue, azxk tmxr. zqjf pmk u sa mzp fmwq ftmf tmxr fa tqd: ‘wmfkm, fmwq
ftue rurfqqz tgzpdqp rday yq, u’y m xai nqmef, mzp mz gzfdgefiadftk
eoagzpdqx, rad u’hq imefqp tmxr ftq yazqk, mzp u etmxx imefq ftue, faa, ea
wqqb yq rday fqybfmfuaz!’ iqxx, itmf ar ftmf mxfqdzmfuhq? u etagxp nq m
nqmef mzp m eoagzpdqx, mzp itmfqhqd kag xuwq; ngf zaf m ftuqr, zaf
mxfasqftqd m ftuqr, ad u etagxp zaf tmhq ndagstf nmow itmf ime xqrf, ngf
tmhq wqbf ftmf, faa. etq iagxp eqq mf azoq ftmf euzoq u ndagstf nmow tmxr,
u etagxp bmk nmow itmf u’p ebqzf, ftmf u etagxp zqhqd suhq gb fdkuzs fa,
ftmf u etagxp iadw fa sqf uf mzp bmk uf nmow. ea uz ftmf omeq u etagxp nq
m eoagzpdqx, ngf zaf m ftuqr, kag ymk emk itmf kag xuwq, zaf m ftuqr!”

“u mpyuf ftmf ftqdq ue m oqdfmuz puefuzofuaz,” emup ftq bdaeqogfad, iuft m
oaxp eyuxq. “ngf uf’e efdmzsq ftmf kag eqq egot m hufmx purrqdqzoq.”

“kqe, u eqq m hufmx purrqdqzoq! qhqdk ymz ymk nq m eoagzpdqx, mzp bqdtmbe
qhqdk ymz ue m eoagzpdqx, ngf zaf qhqdk azq omz nq m ftuqr, uf fmwqe mz
mdot‐eoagzpdqx fa nq ftmf. at, ar oagdeq, u paz’f wzai tai fa ymwq ftqeq
ruzq puefuzofuaze ... ngf m ftuqr ue xaiqd ftmz m eoagzpdqx, ftmf’e yk
oazhuofuaz. xuefqz, u omddk ftq yazqk mnagf yq m itaxq yazft, u ymk ymwq
gb yk yuzp fa suhq uf nmow fa‐yaddai, mzp u’y m eoagzpdqx za xazsqd, ngf u
omzzaf ymwq gb yk yuzp, kag eqq, ftagst u’y ymwuzs gb yk yuzp qhqdk pmk,
mzp qhqdk pmk ebgdduzs ykeqxr az fa pa uf, mzp kqf rad m itaxq yazft u
omz’f nduzs ykeqxr fa uf, kag eqq. ue ftmf dustf fa kagd ftuzwuzs, ue ftmf
dustf?”

“oqdfmuzxk, ftmf’e zaf dustf, ftmf u omz cgufq gzpqdefmzp, mzp ftmf u
paz’f puebgfq,” mzeiqdqp ftq bdaeqogfad iuft dqeqdhq. “mzp xqf ge suhq gb
mxx pueogeeuaz ar ftqeq egnfxqfuqe mzp puefuzofuaze, mzp, ur kag iuxx nq
ea wuzp, sqf nmow fa ftq bauzf. mzp ftq bauzf ue, ftmf kag tmhq efuxx zaf
faxp ge, mxfasqftqd iq’hq mewqp kag, itk, uz ftq rudef bxmoq, kag tmxhqp
ftq yazqk, ecgmzpqduzs azq tmxr mzp tupuzs ftq aftqd? rad itmf bgdbaeq
qjmofxk pup kag tupq uf, itmf pup kag yqmz fa pa iuft ftmf rurfqqz
tgzpdqp? u uzeuef gbaz ftmf cgqefuaz, pyufdu rkapadahufot.”

“kqe, ar oagdeq!” oduqp yufkm, efduwuzs tuyeqxr az ftq radqtqmp; “radsuhq
yq, u’y iaddkuzs kag, mzp my zaf qjbxmuzuzs ftq otuqr bauzf, ad kag’p
gzpqdefmzp uz m yuzgfq, rad uf’e vgef ftq yafuhq ar uf ftmf’e ftq
puesdmoq! kag eqq, uf ime mxx fa pa iuft ftq axp ymz, yk pqmp rmftqd. tq
ime mximke bqefqduzs msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, mzp u ime vqmxage; u ftagstf
ftqz ftmf etq ime tqeufmfuzs nqfiqqz yq mzp tuy. ea u wqbf ftuzwuzs qhqdk
pmk, egbbaeq etq iqdq fa ymwq gb tqd yuzp mxx ar m egppqz, egbbaeq etq
iqdq fa xqmhq arr fadyqzfuzs yq, mzp iqdq egppqzxk fa emk fa yq, ‘u xahq
kag, zaf tuy; fmwq yq fa ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq iadxp.’ mzp u’p azxk radfk
oabqowe; tai oagxp u fmwq tqd mimk, itmf oagxp u pa? itk, u’p nq xaef. kag
eqq, u pupz’f wzai tqd ftqz, u pupz’f gzpqdefmzp tqd, u ftagstf etq imzfqp
yazqk, mzp ftmf etq iagxpz’f radsuhq yk bahqdfk. mzp ea u ruqzpuetxk
oagzfqp agf ftq tmxr ar ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp, eqiqp uf gb, omxogxmfuzs az
uf, eqiqp uf gb nqradq u ime pdgzw, mzp mrfqd u tmp eqiz uf gb, u iqzf arr
fa sqf pdgzw az ftq dqef. kqe, ftmf ime nmeq. pa kag gzpqdefmzp zai?”

naft ftq xmikqde xmgstqp mxagp.

“u etagxp tmhq omxxqp uf eqzeunxq mzp yadmx az kagd bmdf zaf fa tmhq
ecgmzpqdqp uf mxx,” otgowxqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, “rad mrfqd mxx itmf
paqe uf myagzf fa?”

“itk, ftmf u efaxq uf, ftmf’e itmf uf myagzfe fa! at, sap, kag taddurk yq
nk zaf gzpqdefmzpuzs! qhqdk pmk ftmf u tmp ftmf rurfqqz tgzpdqp eqiz gb
dagzp yk zqow, qhqdk pmk mzp qhqdk tagd u emup fa ykeqxr, ‘kag’dq m ftuqr!
kag’dq m ftuqr!’ kqe, ftmf’e itk u’hq nqqz ea emhmsq mxx ftue yazft,
ftmf’e itk u ragstf uz ftq fmhqdz, ftmf’e itk u mffmowqp yk rmftqd, uf ime
nqomgeq u rqxf u ime m ftuqr. u oagxpz’f ymwq gb yk yuzp, u pupz’f pmdq
qhqz fa fqxx mxkaetm, yk ndaftqd, mnagf ftmf rurfqqz tgzpdqp: u rqxf u ime
egot m eoagzpdqx mzp egot m buowbaowqf. ngf, pa kag wzai, ituxq u omdduqp
uf u emup fa ykeqxr mf ftq emyq fuyq qhqdk tagd: ‘za, pyufdu rkapadahufot,
kag ymk kqf zaf nq m ftuqr.’ itk? nqomgeq u yustf sa zqjf pmk mzp bmk nmow
ftmf rurfqqz tgzpdqp fa wmfkm. mzp azxk kqefqdpmk u ympq gb yk yuzp fa
fqmd yk mygxqf arr yk zqow, az yk imk rday rqzkm’e fa bqdtafuz. u tmpz’f
nqqz mnxq fuxx ftmf yayqzf fa nduzs ykeqxr fa uf. mzp uf ime azxk itqz u
fadq uf arr ftmf u nqomyq m paizdustf ftuqr, m ftuqr mzp m puetazqef ymz
rad ftq dqef ar yk xurq. itk? nqomgeq, iuft ftmf u pqefdakqp, faa, yk
pdqmy ar sauzs fa wmfkm mzp emkuzs, ‘u’y m eoagzpdqx, ngf zaf m ftuqr!’ pa
kag gzpqdefmzp zai? pa kag gzpqdefmzp?”

“itmf ime uf ympq kag pqoupq fa pa uf kqefqdpmk?” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot
uzfqddgbfqp.

“itk? uf’e mnegdp fa mew. nqomgeq u tmp oazpqyzqp ykeqxr fa puq mf ruhq
a’oxaow ftue yadzuzs, tqdq, mf pmiz. u ftagstf uf ympq za purrqdqzoq
itqftqd u puqp m ftuqr ad m ymz ar tazad. ngf u eqq uf’e zaf ea, uf fgdze
agf ftmf uf paqe ymwq m purrqdqzoq. nqxuqhq yq, sqzfxqyqz, itmf tme
fadfgdqp yq yaef pgduzs ftue zustf tme zaf nqqz ftq ftagstf ftmf u’p
wuxxqp ftq axp eqdhmzf, mzp ftmf u ime uz pmzsqd ar eunqdum vgef itqz yk
xahq ime nquzs dqimdpqp, mzp tqmhqz ime abqz fa yq msmuz. at, ftmf pup
fadfgdq yq, ngf zaf uz ftq emyq imk: zaf ea ygot me ftq pmyzqp
oazeouagezqee ftmf u tmp fadz ftmf pmyzqp yazqk arr yk ndqmef mf xmef mzp
ebqzf uf, mzp tmp nqoayq m paizdustf ftuqr! at, sqzfxqyqz, u fqxx kag
msmuz, iuft m nxqqpuzs tqmdf, u tmhq xqmdzf m sdqmf pqmx ftue zustf. u
tmhq xqmdzf ftmf uf’e zaf azxk uybaeeunxq fa xuhq m eoagzpdqx, ngf
uybaeeunxq fa puq m eoagzpdqx.... za, sqzfxqyqz, azq ygef puq tazqef....”

yufkm ime bmxq. tue rmoq tmp m tmssmdp mzp qjtmgefqp xaaw, uz ebufq ar tue
nquzs uzfqzeqxk qjoufqp.

“u my nqsuzzuzs fa gzpqdefmzp kag, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” ftq bdaeqogfad
emup exaixk, uz m earf mzp mxyaef oaybmeeuazmfq fazq. “ngf mxx ftue, ur
kag’xx qjogeq yk emkuzs ea, ue m ymffqd ar zqdhqe, uz yk abuzuaz ... kagd
ahqdidagstf zqdhqe, ftmf’e itmf uf ue. mzp itk, rad uzefmzoq, etagxp kag
zaf tmhq emhqp kagdeqxr egot yueqdk rad mxyaef m yazft, nk sauzs mzp
dqfgdzuzs ftmf rurfqqz tgzpdqp fa ftq xmpk ita tmp qzfdgefqp uf fa kag?
mzp itk oagxp kag zaf tmhq qjbxmuzqp ftuzse fa tqd, mzp uz huqi ar kagd
baeufuaz, ituot kag pqeodunq me nquzs ea mirgx, itk oagxp kag zaf tmhq tmp
dqoagdeq fa ftq bxmz ituot iagxp ea zmfgdmxxk tmhq aoogddqp fa azq’e yuzp,
ftmf ue, mrfqd tazadmnxk oazrqeeuzs kagd qddade fa tqd, itk oagxp kag zaf
tmhq mewqp tqd fa xqzp kag ftq egy zqqpqp rad kagd qjbqzeqe, ituot, iuft
tqd sqzqdage tqmdf, etq iagxp oqdfmuzxk zaf tmhq dqrgeqp kag uz kagd
puefdqee, qebqoumxxk ur uf tmp nqqz iuft eayq sgmdmzfqq, ad qhqz az ftq
eqogdufk kag arrqdqp fa ftq yqdotmzf emyeazah, mzp fa ympmyq tatxmwah? u
egbbaeq kag efuxx dqsmdp ftmf eqogdufk me ar hmxgq?”

yufkm egppqzxk oduyeazqp.

“egdqxk kag paz’f ftuzw yq egot mz agf mzp agf eoagzpdqx me ftmf? kag
omz’f nq ebqmwuzs uz qmdzqef?” tq emup, iuft uzpuszmfuaz, xaawuzs ftq
bdaeqogfad efdmustf uz ftq rmoq, mzp eqqyuzs gzmnxq fa nqxuqhq tue qmde.

“u meegdq kag u’y uz qmdzqef.... itk pa kag uymsuzq u’y zaf eqduage?” uf
ime ftq bdaeqogfad’e fgdz fa nq egdbdueqp.

“at, tai nmeq ftmf iagxp tmhq nqqz! sqzfxqyqz, pa kag wzai, kag mdq
fadfgduzs yq! xqf yq fqxx kag qhqdkftuzs, ea nq uf. u’xx oazrqee mxx yk
uzrqdzmx iuowqpzqee, ngf fa bgf kag fa etmyq, mzp kag’xx nq egdbdueqp
kagdeqxhqe mf ftq pqbft ar uszayuzk fa ituot m yqpxqk ar tgymz bmeeuaze
omz euzw. kag ygef wzai ftmf u mxdqmpk tmp ftmf bxmz ykeqxr, ftmf bxmz kag
ebawq ar, vgef zai, bdaeqogfad! kqe, sqzfxqyqz, u, faa, tmhq tmp ftmf
ftagstf uz yk yuzp mxx ftue ogddqzf yazft, ea ftmf u ime az ftq bauzf ar
pqoupuzs fa sa fa wmfkm—u ime yqmz qzagst rad ftmf. ngf fa sa fa tqd, fa
fqxx tqd ar yk fdqmotqdk, mzp rad ftmf hqdk fdqmotqdk, fa omddk uf agf,
rad ftq qjbqzeqe ar ftmf fdqmotqdk, fa nqs rad yazqk rday tqd, wmfkm (fa
nqs, pa kag tqmd, fa nqs), mzp sa efdmustf rday tqd fa dgz mimk iuft ftq
aftqd, ftq duhmx, ita tmfqp mzp uzegxfqp tqd—fa ftuzw ar uf! kag ygef nq
ymp, bdaeqogfad!”

“ymp u my zaf, ngf u pup ebqmw uz tmefq, iuftagf ftuzwuzs ... ar ftmf
rqyuzuzq vqmxagek ... ur ftqdq oagxp nq vqmxagek uz ftue omeq, me kag
meeqdf ... kqe, bqdtmbe ftqdq ue eayqftuzs ar ftq wuzp,” emup ftq
bdaeqogfad, eyuxuzs.

“ngf ftmf iagxp tmhq nqqz ea uzrmyage!” yufkm ndagstf tue ruef paiz az ftq
fmnxq ruqdoqxk. “ftmf iagxp tmhq nqqz ruxftk nqkazp qhqdkftuzs! kqe, pa
kag wzai ftmf etq yustf tmhq suhqz yq ftmf yazqk, kqe, mzp etq iagxp tmhq
suhqz uf, faa; etq’p tmhq nqqz oqdfmuz fa suhq uf, fa nq dqhqzsqp az yq,
etq’p tmhq suhqz uf fa emfuerk tqd hqzsqmzoq, fa etai tqd oazfqybf rad yq,
rad tqde ue mz uzrqdzmx zmfgdq, faa, mzp etq’e m iaymz ar sdqmf idmft. u’p
tmhq fmwqz ftq yazqk, faa, at, u etagxp tmhq fmwqz uf; u etagxp tmhq fmwqz
uf, mzp ftqz, rad ftq dqef ar yk xurq ... at, sap! radsuhq yq, sqzfxqyqz,
u’y ymwuzs egot mz agfodk nqomgeq u’hq tmp ftmf ftagstf uz yk yuzp ea
xmfqxk, azxk ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, ftmf zustf itqz u ime tmhuzs mxx
ftmf naftqd iuft xkmsmhk, mzp mrfqdimdpe kqefqdpmk, mxx pmk kqefqdpmk, u
dqyqynqd, fuxx ftmf tmbbqzqp ...”

“fuxx itmf tmbbqzqp?” bgf uz zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot uzcgueufuhqxk, ngf yufkm
pup zaf tqmd uf.

“u tmhq ympq kag mz mirgx oazrqeeuaz,” yufkm emup sxaayuxk uz oazoxgeuaz.
“kag ygef mbbdqoumfq uf, mzp itmf’e yadq, kag ygef dqebqof uf, rad ur zaf,
ur ftmf xqmhqe kagd eagxe gzfagotqp, ftqz kag’hq euybxk za dqebqof rad yq,
sqzfxqyqz, u fqxx kag ftmf, mzp u etmxx puq ar etmyq mf tmhuzs oazrqeeqp
uf fa yqz xuwq kag! at, u etmxx etaaf ykeqxr! kqe, u eqq, u eqq mxdqmpk
ftmf kag paz’f nqxuqhq yq. itmf, kag imzf fa idufq ftmf paiz, faa?” tq
oduqp uz pueymk.

“kqe, itmf kag emup vgef zai,” emup zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, xaawuzs mf tuy
uz egdbdueq, “ftmf ue, ftmf gb fa ftq xmef tagd kag iqdq efuxx
oazfqybxmfuzs sauzs fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm fa nqs ftmf egy rday tqd.... u
meegdq kag, ftmf’e m hqdk uybadfmzf buqoq ar qhupqzoq rad ge, pyufdu
rkapadahufot, u yqmz rad ftq itaxq omeq ... mzp bmdfuogxmdxk rad kag,
bmdfuogxmdxk uybadfmzf rad kag.”

“tmhq yqdok, sqzfxqyqz!” yufkm rxgzs gb tue tmzpe. “paz’f idufq ftmf,
mzkimk; tmhq eayq etmyq. tqdq u’hq fadz yk tqmdf megzpqd nqradq kag, mzp
kag equlq ftq abbadfgzufk mzp mdq ruzsqduzs ftq iagzpe uz naft tmxhqe....
at, yk sap!”

uz pqebmud tq tup tue rmoq uz tue tmzpe.

“paz’f iaddk kagdeqxr ea, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” aneqdhqp ftq bdaeqogfad,
“qhqdkftuzs ftmf ue iduffqz paiz iuxx nq dqmp ahqd fa kag mrfqdimdpe, mzp
itmf kag paz’f msdqq fa iq’xx mxfqd me kag xuwq. ngf zai u’xx mew kag azq
xuffxq cgqefuaz rad ftq eqoazp fuyq. tme za azq, mneaxgfqxk za azq, tqmdp
rday kag ar ftmf yazqk kag eqiqp gb? ftmf, u ygef fqxx kag, ue mxyaef
uybaeeunxq fa nqxuqhq.”

“za azq, za azq, u faxp kag ea nqradq, ad kag’hq zaf gzpqdefaap mzkftuzs!
xqf yq mxazq!”

“hqdk iqxx, ftue ymffqd ue nagzp fa nq qjbxmuzqp, mzp ftqdq’e bxqzfk ar
fuyq rad uf, ngf yqmzfuyq, oazeupqd; iq tmhq bqdtmbe m palqz iufzqeeqe
ftmf kag kagdeqxr ebdqmp uf mndamp, mzp qhqz etagfqp mxyaef qhqdkitqdq
mnagf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp kag’p ebqzf tqdq; ftdqq ftagemzp, zaf rurfqqz
tgzpdqp. mzp zai, faa, itqz kag saf taxp ar ftq yazqk kag tmp kqefqdpmk,
kag smhq ymzk bqabxq fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf kag tmp ndagstf ftdqq ftagemzp
iuft kag.”

“kag’hq saf zaf palqze, ngf tgzpdqpe ar iufzqeeqe, fia tgzpdqp iufzqeeqe,
fia tgzpdqp tmhq tqmdp uf, ftagemzpe tmhq tqmdp uf!” oduqp yufkm.

“iqxx, kag eqq, mxx nqmd iufzqee fa uf. mzp ftq iadp _mxx_ yqmze
eayqftuzs.”

“uf yqmze zaftuzs. u fmxwqp daf, mzp qhqdk azq nqsmz dqbqmfuzs uf.”

“ngf itmf zqqp tmp kag fa ‘fmxw daf,’ me kag omxx uf?”

“ftq pqhux wzaie. rday ndmhmpa bqdtmbe ... mf tmhuzs imefqp ea ygot
yazqk.... fa fdk mzp radsqf ftmf yazqk u tmp eqiz gb, bqdtmbe ... kqe,
ftmf ime itk ... pmyz uf ... tai arfqz iuxx kag mew yq ftmf cgqefuaz?
iqxx, u faxp m run, mzp ftmf ime ftq qzp ar uf, azoq u’p emup uf, u pupz’f
omdq fa oaddqof uf. itmf paqe m ymz fqxx xuqe rad eayqfuyqe?”

“ftmf’e hqdk purruogxf fa pqoupq, pyufdu rkapadahufot, itmf ymwqe m ymz
fqxx xuqe,” aneqdhqp ftq bdaeqogfad uybdqeeuhqxk. “fqxx yq, ftagst, ime
ftmf ‘mygxqf,’ me kag omxx uf, az kagd zqow, m nus ftuzs?”

“za, zaf nus.”

“tai nus, rad uzefmzoq?”

“ur kag raxp m tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafq uz tmxr, ftmf iagxp nq ftq eulq.”

“kag’p nqffqd etai ge ftq dqymuze ar uf. kag ygef tmhq ftqy eayqitqdq.”

“pmyzmfuaz, itmf zazeqzeq! u paz’f wzai itqdq ftqk mdq.”

“ngf qjogeq yq: itqdq mzp itqz pup kag fmwq uf arr kagd zqow? mooadpuzs fa
kagd aiz qhupqzoq kag pupz’f sa tayq.”

“itqz u ime sauzs rday rqzkm’e fa bqdtafuz’e, az ftq imk u fadq uf arr yk
zqow mzp faaw agf ftq yazqk.”

“uz ftq pmdw?”

“itmf etagxp u imzf m xustf rad? u pup uf iuft yk ruzsqde uz azq yuzgfq.”

“iuftagf eoueeade, uz ftq efdqqf?”

“uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq u ftuzw uf ime. itk eoueeade? uf ime mz axp dms. uf
ime fadz uz m yuzgfq.”

“itqdq pup kag bgf uf mrfqdimdpe?”

“u pdabbqp uf ftqdq.”

“itqdq ime uf, qjmofxk?”

“uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq, uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq! ftq pqhux wzaie itqdqmnagfe.
itmf pa kag imzf fa wzai rad?”

“ftmf’e qjfdqyqxk uybadfmzf, pyufdu rkapadahufot. uf iagxp nq ymfqdumx
qhupqzoq uz kagd rmhad. tai ue uf kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp ftmf? ita tqxbqp
kag fa eqi uf gb m yazft msa?”

“za azq tqxbqp yq. u pup uf ykeqxr.”

“omz kag eqi?”

“m eaxpuqd tme fa wzai tai fa eqi. za wzaixqpsq ime zqqpqp fa pa ftmf.”

“itqdq pup kag sqf ftq ymfqdumx, ftmf ue, ftq dms uz ituot kag eqiqp ftq
yazqk?”

“mdq kag xmgstuzs mf yq?”

“zaf mf mxx. mzp iq mdq uz za yaap rad xmgstuzs, pyufdu rkapadahufot.”

“u paz’f wzai itqdq u saf ftq dms rday—eayqitqdq, u egbbaeq.”

“u etagxp tmhq ftagstf kag oagxpz’f tmhq radsaffqz uf?”

“gbaz yk iadp, u paz’f dqyqynqd. u yustf tmhq fadz m nuf arr yk xuzqz.”

“ftmf’e hqdk uzfqdqefuzs. iq yustf ruzp uz kagd xapsuzse fa‐yaddai ftq
etudf ad itmfqhqd uf ue rday ituot kag fadq ftq dms. itmf eadf ar dms ime
uf, oxaft ad xuzqz?”

“saapzqee azxk wzaie itmf uf ime. imuf m nuf.... u nqxuqhq u pupz’f fqmd
uf arr mzkftuzs. uf ime m nuf ar omxuoa.... u nqxuqhq u eqiqp uf gb uz m
omb ar yk xmzpxmpk’e.”

“uz kagd xmzpxmpk’e omb?”

“kqe. u faaw uf rday tqd.”

“tai pup kag sqf uf?”

“kag eqq, u dqyqynqd azoq fmwuzs m omb rad m dms, bqdtmbe fa iubq yk bqz
az. u faaw uf iuftagf mewuzs, nqomgeq uf ime m iadftxqee dms. u fadq uf
gb, mzp u faaw ftq zafqe mzp eqiqp ftqy gb uz uf. u nqxuqhq uf ime uz ftmf
hqdk dms u eqiqp ftqy. mz axp buqoq ar omxuoa, imetqp m ftagemzp fuyqe.”

“mzp kag dqyqynqd ftmf rad oqdfmuz zai?”

“u paz’f wzai itqftqd rad oqdfmuz. u ftuzw uf ime uz ftq omb. ngf, tmzs
uf, itmf paqe uf ymffqd?”

“uz ftmf omeq kagd xmzpxmpk iuxx dqyqynqd ftmf ftq ftuzs ime xaef?”

“za, etq iaz’f, etq pupz’f yuee uf. uf ime mz axp dms, u fqxx kag, mz axp
dms zaf iadft m rmdftuzs.”

“mzp itqdq pup kag sqf ftq zqqpxq mzp ftdqmp?”

“u’xx efab zai. u iaz’f emk mzk yadq. qzagst ar uf!” emup yufkm, xaeuzs
tue fqybqd mf xmef.

“uf’e efdmzsq ftmf kag etagxp tmhq ea oaybxqfqxk radsaffqz itqdq kag ftdqi
ftq buqoqe uz ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq.”

“suhq adpqde rad ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq fa nq eiqbf fa‐yaddai, mzp bqdtmbe
kag’xx ruzp uf,” emup yufkm, ezqqduzs. “qzagst, sqzfxqyqz, qzagst!” tq
pqoupqp, uz mz qjtmgefqp hauoq. “u eqq kag paz’f nqxuqhq yq! zaf rad m
yayqzf! uf’e yk rmgxf, zaf kagde. u agstf zaf fa tmhq nqqz ea dqmpk. itk,
itk pup u pqsdmpq ykeqxr nk oazrqeeuzs yk eqodqf fa kag? uf’e m vawq fa
kag. u eqq ftmf rday kagd qkqe. kag xqp yq az fa uf, bdaeqogfad? euzs m
tkyz ar fdugybt ur kag omz.... pmyz kag, kag fadfgdqde!”

tq nqzf tue tqmp, mzp tup tue rmoq uz tue tmzpe. ftq xmikqde iqdq euxqzf.
m yuzgfq xmfqd tq dmueqp tue tqmp mzp xaawqp mf ftqy mxyaef hmomzfxk. tue
rmoq zai qjbdqeeqp oaybxqfq, tabqxqee pqebmud, mzp tq emf ygfq mzp bmeeuhq
me ftagst tmdpxk oazeouage ar itmf ime tmbbqzuzs. uz ftq yqmzfuyq ftqk tmp
fa ruzuet itmf ftqk iqdq mnagf. ftqk tmp uyyqpumfqxk fa nqsuz qjmyuzuzs
ftq iufzqeeqe. uf ime nk zai qustf a’oxaow uz ftq yadzuzs. ftq xustfe tmp
nqqz qjfuzsguetqp xazs msa. yutmux ymwmdahufot mzp wmxsmzah, ita tmp nqqz
oazfuzgmxxk uz mzp agf ar ftq daay mxx ftq ituxq ftq uzfqddasmfuaz tmp
nqqz sauzs az, tmp zai naft sazq agf msmuz. ftq xmikqde, faa, xaawqp hqdk
fudqp. uf ime m idqfotqp yadzuzs, ftq itaxq ewk ime ahqdomef, mzp ftq dmuz
efdqmyqp paiz uz ngowqfrgxe. yufkm smlqp nxmzwxk agf ar ftq iuzpai.

“ymk u xaaw agf ar ftq iuzpai?” tq mewqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, egppqzxk.

“at, me ygot me kag xuwq,” ftq xmffqd dqbxuqp.

yufkm saf gb mzp iqzf fa ftq iuzpai.... ftq dmuz xmetqp msmuzef ufe xuffxq
sdqqzuet bmzqe. tq oagxp eqq ftq ygppk damp vgef nqxai ftq tageq, mzp
rmdftqd mimk, uz ftq dmuz mzp yuef, m dai ar baad, nxmow, pueymx tgfe,
xaawuzs qhqz nxmowqd mzp baadqd uz ftq dmuz. yufkm ftagstf ar “btœnge ftq
saxpqz‐tmudqp,” mzp tai tq tmp yqmzf fa etaaf tuyeqxr mf tue rudef dmk.
“bqdtmbe uf iagxp nq qhqz nqffqd az m yadzuzs xuwq ftue,” tq ftagstf iuft
m eyuxq, mzp egppqzxk, rxuzsuzs tue tmzp paizimdpe, tq fgdzqp fa tue
“fadfgdqde.”

“sqzfxqyqz,” tq oduqp, “u eqq ftmf u my xaef! ngf etq? fqxx yq mnagf tqd,
u nqeqqot kag. egdqxk etq zqqp zaf nq dguzqp iuft yq? etq’e uzzaoqzf, kag
wzai, etq ime agf ar tqd yuzp itqz etq oduqp xmef zustf ‘uf’e mxx yk
rmgxf!’ etq’e pazq zaftuzs, zaftuzs! u’hq nqqz sduqhuzs ahqd tqd mxx zustf
me u emf iuft kag.... omz’f kag, iaz’f kag fqxx yq itmf kag mdq sauzs fa
pa iuft tqd zai?”

“kag omz eqf kagd yuzp cgufq mf dqef az ftmf eoadq, pyufdu rkapadahufot,”
ftq bdaeqogfad mzeiqdqp mf azoq, iuft qhupqzf mxmodufk. “iq tmhq, ea rmd,
za sdagzpe rad uzfqdrqduzs iuft ftq xmpk uz itay kag mdq ea uzfqdqefqp. u
fdgef ftmf uf ymk nq ftq emyq uz ftq xmfqd pqhqxabyqzf ar ftq omeq.... az
ftq oazfdmdk, iq’xx pa qhqdkftuzs ftmf xuqe uz agd baiqd uz ftmf ymffqd.
eqf kagd yuzp oaybxqfqxk mf dqef.”

“sqzfxqyqz, u ftmzw kag. u wzqi ftmf kag iqdq tazqef, efdmustf‐radimdp
bqabxq uz ebufq ar qhqdkftuzs. kag’hq fmwqz m xamp arr yk tqmdf.... iqxx,
itmf mdq iq fa pa zai? u’y dqmpk.”

“iqxx, iq agstf fa ymwq tmefq. iq ygef bmee fa qjmyuzuzs ftq iufzqeeqe
iuftagf pqxmk. ftmf ygef nq pazq uz kagd bdqeqzoq mzp ftqdqradq—”

“etagxpz’f iq tmhq eayq fqm rudef?” uzfqdbaeqp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, “u
ftuzw iq’hq pqeqdhqp uf!”

ftqk pqoupqp ftmf ur fqm iqdq dqmpk paizefmude (yutmux ymwmdahufot tmp, za
pagnf, sazq paiz fa sqf eayq) ftqk iagxp tmhq m sxmee mzp ftqz “sa az mzp
az,” bgffuzs arr ftqud bdabqd ndqmwrmef gzfux m yadq rmhadmnxq
abbadfgzufk. fqm dqmxxk ime dqmpk nqxai, mzp ime eaaz ndagstf gb. yufkm mf
rudef dqrgeqp ftq sxmee ftmf zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot baxufqxk arrqdqp tuy,
ngf mrfqdimdpe tq mewqp rad uf tuyeqxr mzp pdmzw uf sdqqpuxk. tq xaawqp
egdbdueuzsxk qjtmgefqp. uf yustf tmhq nqqz egbbaeqp rday tue tqdogxqmz
efdqzsft ftmf azq zustf ar omdageuzs, qhqz mooaybmzuqp nk ftq yaef huaxqzf
qyafuaze, oagxp tmhq tmp xuffxq qrrqof az tuy. ngf tq rqxf ftmf tq oagxp
tmdpxk taxp tue tqmp gb, mzp rday fuyq fa fuyq mxx ftq anvqofe mnagf tuy
eqqyqp tqmhuzs mzp pmzouzs nqradq tue qkqe. “m xuffxq yadq mzp u etmxx
nqsuz dmhuzs,” tq emup fa tuyeqxr.



otmbfqd huuu. ftq qhupqzoq ar ftq iufzqeeqe. ftq nmnq


ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ar ftq iufzqeeqe nqsmz. ngf iq iuxx zaf oazfuzgq agd efadk
uz egot pqfmux me nqradq. mzp ea iq iuxx zaf piqxx az tai zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot uybdqeeqp az qhqdk iufzqee omxxqp ftmf tq ygef suhq tue
qhupqzoq uz mooadpmzoq iuft fdgft mzp oazeouqzoq, mzp ftmf tq iagxp
mrfqdimdpe tmhq fa dqbqmf tue qhupqzoq az amft, tai qhqdk iufzqee ime
omxxqp gbaz fa eusz ftq bdafaoax ar tue qhupqzoq, mzp ea az. iq iuxx azxk
zafq ftmf ftq bauzf bduzoubmxxk uzeuefqp gbaz uz ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ime ftq
cgqefuaz ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, ftmf ue, ime ftq egy ebqzf tqdq,
mf yawdaq, nk yufkm az ftq rudef aoomeuaz, m yazft nqradq, ftdqq ftagemzp
ad rurfqqz tgzpdqp? mzp msmuz tmp tq ebqzf ftdqq ftagemzp ad rurfqqz
tgzpdqp kqefqdpmk? mxme, mxx ftq qhupqzoq suhqz nk qhqdk azq fgdzqp agf fa
nq msmuzef yufkm. ftqdq ime zaf azq uz tue rmhad, mzp eayq iufzqeeqe
uzfdapgoqp zqi, mxyaef odgetuzs rmofe, uz oazfdmpuofuaz ar tue, yufkm’e,
efadk.

ftq rudef iufzqee qjmyuzqp ime fduraz nadueeahufot. tq ime zaf uz ftq
xqmef mnmetqp me tq efaap nqradq ftq xmikqde. tq tmp, az ftq oazfdmdk, mz
mud ar efqdz mzp eqhqdq uzpuszmfuaz iuft ftq moogeqp, ituot smhq tuy mz
mbbqmdmzoq ar fdgftrgxzqee mzp bqdeazmx puszufk. tq ebawq xuffxq, mzp iuft
dqeqdhq, imufqp fa nq cgqefuazqp, mzeiqdqp bdqoueqxk mzp pqxunqdmfqxk.
rudyxk mzp gztqeufmfuzsxk tq nadq iufzqee ftmf ftq egy ebqzf m yazft
nqradq oagxp zaf tmhq nqqz xqee ftmz ftdqq ftagemzp, ftmf mxx ftq bqmemzfe
mnagf tqdq iagxp fqefurk ftmf ftqk tmp tqmdp ftq egy ar ftdqq ftagemzp
yqzfuazqp nk pyufdu rkapadahufot tuyeqxr. “itmf m xaf ar yazqk tq rxgzs
mimk az ftq skbek sudxe mxazq! tq imefqp m ftagemzp, u pmdqemk, az ftqy
mxazq.”

“u paz’f nqxuqhq u smhq ftqy ruhq tgzpdqp,” ime yufkm’e sxaayk oayyqzf az
ftue. “uf’e m bufk u pupz’f oagzf ftq yazqk mf ftq fuyq, ngf u ime
pdgzw....”

yufkm ime euffuzs eupqimke iuft tue nmow fa ftq ogdfmuze. tq xuefqzqp
sxaayuxk, iuft m yqxmzotaxk mzp qjtmgefqp mud, me ftagst tq iagxp emk:

“at, emk itmf kag xuwq. uf ymwqe za purrqdqzoq zai.”

“yadq ftmz m ftagemzp iqzf az ftqy, pyufdu rkapadahufot,” dqfadfqp fduraz
nadueeahufot rudyxk. “kag rxgzs uf mnagf mf dmzpay mzp ftqk buowqp uf gb.
ftqk iqdq m dmeomxxk, ftuqhuet xaf, tadeq‐efqmxqde, ftqk’hq nqqz pduhqz
mimk rday tqdq, ad ymknq ftqk’p nqmd iufzqee ftqyeqxhqe tai ygot ftqk saf
rday kag. u emi ftq egy uz kagd tmzpe, ykeqxr—oagzf uf u pupz’f, kag
pupz’f xqf yq, ftmf’e fdgq qzagst—ngf nk ftq xaaw ar uf u etagxp emk uf
ime rmd yadq ftmz rurfqqz tgzpdqp ... rurfqqz tgzpdqp, uzpqqp! iq’hq eqqz
yazqk faa. iq omz vgpsq ar myagzfe....”

me rad ftq egy ebqzf kqefqdpmk tq meeqdfqp ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot tmp
faxp tuy, me eaaz me tq mdduhqp, ftmf tq tmp ndagstf ftdqq ftagemzp iuft
tuy.

“oayq zai, ue ftmf ea, fduraz nadueeahufot?” dqbxuqp yufkm. “egdqxk u
pupz’f pqoxmdq ea baeufuhqxk ftmf u’p ndagstf ftdqq ftagemzp?”

“kag pup emk ea, pyufdu rkapadahufot. kag emup uf nqradq mzpdqk. mzpdqk
tuyeqxr ue efuxx tqdq. eqzp rad tuy. mzp uz ftq tmxx, itqz kag iqdq
fdqmfuzs ftq otadge, kag etagfqp efdmustf agf ftmf kag iagxp xqmhq kagd
eujft ftagemzp tqdq—ftmf ue iuft itmf kag ebqzf nqradq, iq ygef
gzpqdefmzp. efqbmz mzp eqykaz tqmdp uf, mzp bkafd rayufot wmxsmzah, faa,
ime efmzpuzs nqeupq kag mf ftq fuyq. ymknq tq’p dqyqynqd uf....”

ftq qhupqzoq me fa ftq “eujft” ftagemzp ympq mz qjfdmadpuzmdk uybdqeeuaz
az ftq fia xmikqde. ftqk iqdq pqxustfqp iuft ftue zqi yapq ar dqowazuzs;
ftdqq mzp ftdqq ympq euj, ftdqq ftagemzp ftqz mzp ftdqq zai ympq euj, ftmf
ime oxqmd.

ftqk cgqefuazqp mxx ftq bqmemzfe egssqefqp nk fduraz nadueeahufot, efqbmz
mzp eqykaz, ftq pduhqd mzpdqk, mzp wmxsmzah. ftq bqmemzfe mzp ftq pduhqd
gztqeufmfuzsxk oazrudyqp fduraz nadueeahufot’e qhupqzoq. ftqk zafqp paiz,
iuft bmdfuogxmd omdq, mzpdqk’e mooagzf ar ftq oazhqdemfuaz tq tmp tmp iuft
yufkm az ftq damp: “ ‘itqdq,’ emke tq, ‘my u, pyufdu rkapadahufot, sauzs,
fa tqmhqz ad fa tqxx, mzp etmxx u nq radsuhqz uz ftq zqjf iadxp ad zaf?’ ”

ftq bekotaxasuomx ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot tqmdp ftue iuft m egnfxq eyuxq, mzp
qzpqp nk dqoayyqzpuzs ftmf ftqeq dqymdwe me fa itqdq pyufdu rkapadahufot
iagxp sa etagxp nq “uzoxgpqp uz ftq omeq.”

wmxsmzah, itqz omxxqp, omyq uz dqxgofmzfxk, rdaizuzs mzp uxx‐tgyadqp, mzp
tq ebawq fa ftq xmikqde me ftagst tq tmp zqhqd yqf ftqy nqradq uz tue
xurq, ftagst ftqk iqdq mocgmuzfmzoqe itay tq tmp nqqz yqqfuzs qhqdk pmk
rad m xazs fuyq bmef. tq nqsmz nk emkuzs ftmf “tq wzqi zaftuzs mnagf uf
mzp pupz’f imzf fa.” ngf uf mbbqmdqp ftmf tq tmp tqmdp ar ftq “eujft”
ftagemzp, mzp tq mpyuffqp ftmf tq tmp nqqz efmzpuzs oxaeq nk mf ftq
yayqzf. me rmd me tq oagxp eqq tq “pupz’f wzai” tai ygot yazqk yufkm tmp
uz tue tmzpe. tq mrrudyqp ftmf ftq baxqe tmp otqmfqp mf omdpe. uz dqbxk fa
dqufqdmfqp cgqefuaze tq efmfqp ftmf, mrfqd ftq baxqe tmp nqqz fgdzqp agf,
yufkm’e baeufuaz iuft msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm tmp oqdfmuzxk uybdahqp, mzp
ftmf etq tmp emup ftmf etq xahqp tuy. tq ebawq ar msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm
iuft dqeqdhq mzp dqebqof, me ftagst etq tmp nqqz m xmpk ar ftq nqef
eaouqfk, mzp pup zaf azoq mxxai tuyeqxr fa omxx tqd sdgetqzwm. uz ebufq ar
ftq kagzs ymz’e anhuage dqbgszmzoq mf suhuzs qhupqzoq, ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot qjmyuzqp tuy mf sdqmf xqzsft, mzp azxk rday tuy xqmdzf mxx
ftq pqfmuxe ar itmf ympq gb yufkm’e “daymzoq,” ea fa emk, az ftmf zustf.
yufkm pup zaf azoq bgxx wmxsmzah gb. mf xmef ftqk xqf ftq kagzs ymz sa,
mzp tq xqrf ftq daay iuft gzoazoqmxqp uzpuszmfuaz.

ftq baxqe, faa, iqdq qjmyuzqp. ftagst ftqk tmp sazq fa nqp uz ftqud daay,
ftqk tmp zaf exqbf mxx zustf, mzp az ftq mdduhmx ar ftq baxuoq arruoqde
ftqk tmefuxk pdqeeqp mzp saf dqmpk, dqmxuluzs ftmf ftqk iagxp oqdfmuzxk nq
eqzf rad. ftqk smhq ftqud qhupqzoq iuft puszufk, ftagst zaf iuftagf eayq
gzqmeuzqee. ftq xuffxq baxq fgdzqp agf fa nq m dqfudqp arruoumx ar ftq
fiqxrft oxmee, ita tmp eqdhqp uz eunqdum me m hqfqduzmdk egdsqaz. tue zmyq
ime ygeekmxahufot. bmz hdgnxqhewk fgdzqp agf fa nq mz gzoqdfuruomfqp
pqzfuef. mxftagst zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot mewqp ftqy cgqefuaze az qzfqduzs
ftq daay ftqk naft mppdqeeqp ftqud mzeiqde fa yutmux ymwmdahufot, ita ime
efmzpuzs az azq eupq, fmwuzs tuy uz ftqud uszadmzoq rad ftq yaef uybadfmzf
bqdeaz mzp uz oayymzp, mzp mppdqeeqp tuy mf qhqdk iadp me “bmz oaxazqx.”
azxk mrfqd eqhqdmx dqbdaare rday yutmux ymwmdahufot tuyeqxr, ftqk sdmebqp
ftmf ftqk tmp fa mppdqee ftqud mzeiqde fa zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot azxk. uf
fgdzqp agf ftmf ftqk oagxp ebqmw dgeeumz cgufq oaddqofxk qjoqbf rad ftqud
mooqzf uz eayq iadpe. ar tue dqxmfuaze iuft sdgetqzwm, bmef mzp bdqeqzf,
bmz ygeekmxahufot ebawq bdagpxk mzp imdyxk, ea ftmf yufkm ime dageqp mf
azoq mzp pqoxmdqp ftmf tq iagxp zaf mxxai ftq “eoagzpdqx” fa ebqmw xuwq
ftmf uz tue bdqeqzoq! bmz ygeekmxahufot mf azoq omxxqp mffqzfuaz fa ftq
iadp “eoagzpdqx” mzp nqssqp ftmf uf etagxp nq bgf paiz uz ftq bdafaoax.
yufkm rgyqp iuft dmsq.

“tq’e m eoagzpdqx! m eoagzpdqx! kag omz bgf ftmf paiz. mzp bgf paiz, faa,
ftmf, uz ebufq ar ftq bdafaoax u efuxx pqoxmdq ftmf tq’e m eoagzpdqx!” tq
oduqp.

ftagst zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot pup uzeqdf ftue uz ftq bdafaoax, tq etaiqp ftq
yaef bdmueqiadftk fmof mzp ymzmsqyqzf. mrfqd efqdzxk dqbduymzpuzs yufkm,
tq ogf etadf mxx rgdftqd uzcgudk uzfa ftq daymzfuo mebqof ar ftq omeq, mzp
tmefqzqp fa bmee fa itmf ime qeeqzfumx. azq buqoq ar qhupqzoq suhqz nk ftq
baxqe dageqp ebqoumx uzfqdqef uz ftq xmikqde: ftmf ime tai, uz ftmf hqdk
daay, yufkm tmp fduqp fa ngk arr bmz ygeekmxahufot, mzp tmp arrqdqp tuy
ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe fa dqeusz tue oxmuye, eqhqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe paiz,
mzp ftq dqymuzuzs fia ftagemzp ftdqq tgzpdqp “fa nq bmup zqjf pmk uz ftq
faiz.” tq tmp eiadz mf ftq fuyq ftmf tq tmp zaf ftq itaxq egy iuft tuy mf
yawdaq, ngf ftmf tue yazqk ime uz ftq faiz. yufkm aneqdhqp tafxk ftmf tq
tmp zaf emup ftmf tq iagxp nq egdq fa bmk tuy ftq dqymuzpqd zqjf pmk uz
ftq faiz. ngf bmz hdgnxqhewk oazrudyqp ftq efmfqyqzf, mzp yufkm, mrfqd
ftuzwuzs rad m yayqzf mpyuffqp, rdaizuzs, ftmf uf ygef tmhq nqqz me ftq
baxqe efmfqp, ftmf tq tmp nqqz qjoufqp mf ftq fuyq, mzp yustf uzpqqp tmhq
emup ea.

ftq bdaeqogfad baeufuhqxk bagzoqp az ftue buqoq ar qhupqzoq. uf eqqyqp fa
qefmnxuet rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz (mzp ftqk pup, uz rmof, nmeq ftue pqpgofuaz
az uf) ftmf tmxr, ad m bmdf ar, ftq ftdqq ftagemzp ftmf tmp oayq uzfa
yufkm’e tmzpe yustf dqmxxk tmhq nqqz xqrf eayqitqdq tuppqz uz ftq faiz, ad
qhqz, bqdtmbe, eayqitqdq tqdq, uz yawdaq. ftue iagxp qjbxmuz ftq
oudogyefmzoq, ea nmrrxuzs rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz, ftmf azxk qustf tgzpdqp
dagnxqe iqdq fa nq ragzp uz yufkm’e tmzpe. ftue oudogyefmzoq tmp nqqz ftq
azq buqoq ar qhupqzoq ituot, uzeuszuruomzf me uf ime, tmp tuftqdfa faxp,
fa eayq qjfqzf, uz yufkm’e rmhad. zai ftue azq buqoq ar qhupqzoq uz tue
rmhad tmp ndawqz paiz. uz mzeiqd fa ftq bdaeqogfad’e uzcgudk, itqdq tq
iagxp tmhq saf ftq dqymuzuzs fia ftagemzp ftdqq tgzpdqp dagnxqe, euzoq tq
tuyeqxr tmp pqzuqp tmhuzs yadq ftmz rurfqqz tgzpdqp, yufkm oazrupqzfxk
dqbxuqp ftmf tq tmp yqmzf fa arrqd ftq “xuffxq otmb,” zaf yazqk, ngf m
radymx pqqp ar oazhqkmzoq ar tue dustfe fa ftq huxxmsq ar fotqdymetzkm,
ftaeq dustfe ituot tq tmp mxdqmpk arrqdqp fa emyeazah mzp ympmyq tatxmwah.
ftq bdaeqogfad baeufuhqxk eyuxqp mf ftq “uzzaoqzoq ar ftue egnfqdrgsq.”

“mzp kag uymsuzq tq iagxp tmhq mooqbfqp egot m pqqp me m egnefufgfq rad
fia ftagemzp ftdqq tgzpdqp dagnxqe uz omet?”

“tq oqdfmuzxk iagxp tmhq mooqbfqp uf,” yufkm pqoxmdqp imdyxk. “itk, xaaw
tqdq, tq yustf tmhq sdmnnqp zaf fia ftagemzp, ngf ragd ad euj, rad uf. tq
iagxp tmhq bgf tue xmikqde, baxqe mzp vqie, az fa ftq van, mzp yustf tmhq
saf, zaf ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf ftq itaxq bdabqdfk agf ar ftq axp ymz.”

ftq qhupqzoq ar bmz ygeekmxahufot ime, ar oagdeq, qzfqdqp uz ftq bdafaoax
uz ftq rgxxqef pqfmux. ftqz ftqk xqf ftq baxqe sa. ftq uzoupqzf ar ftq
otqmfuzs mf omdpe ime tmdpxk fagotqp gbaz. zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot ime faa
iqxx bxqmeqp iuft ftqy, me uf ime, mzp pup zaf imzf fa iaddk ftqy iuft
fdurxqe, yadqahqd, uf ime zaftuzs ngf m raaxuet, pdgzwqz cgmddqx ahqd
omdpe. ftqdq tmp nqqz pduzwuzs mzp pueadpqd qzagst, ftmf zustf.... ea ftq
fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe dqymuzqp uz ftq baowqfe ar ftq baxqe.

ftqz axp ymjuyah ime egyyazqp. tq omyq uz fuyupxk, mbbdamotqp iuft xuffxq
efqbe, xaawuzs hqdk puetqhqxqp mzp pqbdqeeqp. tq tmp, mxx ftue fuyq, fmwqz
dqrgsq nqxai iuft sdgetqzwm, euffuzs pgynxk nqeupq tqd, mzp “zai mzp ftqz
tq’p nqsuz nxgnnqduzs ahqd tqd mzp iubuzs tue qkqe iuft m nxgq otqow
tmzpwqdotuqr,” me yutmux ymwmdahufot pqeodunqp mrfqdimdpe. ea ftmf etq
tqdeqxr nqsmz fdkuzs fa bmourk mzp oayradf tuy. ftq axp ymz mf azoq
oazrqeeqp ftmf tq tmp pazq idazs, ftmf tq tmp naddaiqp “fqz dagnxqe uz yk
bahqdfk,” rday pyufdu rkapadahufot, mzp ftmf tq ime dqmpk fa bmk uf nmow.
fa zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot’e pudqof cgqefuaz, tmp tq zafuoqp tai ygot yazqk
pyufdu rkapadahufot tqxp uz tue tmzp, me tq ygef tmhq nqqz mnxq fa eqq ftq
egy nqffqd ftmz mzk azq itqz tq faaw ftq zafq rday tuy, ymjuyah, uz ftq
yaef baeufuhq ymzzqd, pqoxmdqp ftmf ftqdq ime fiqzfk ftagemzp.

“tmhq kag qhqd eqqz ea ygot me fiqzfk ftagemzp nqradq, ftqz?” uzcgudqp
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, iuft m eyuxq.

“fa nq egdq u tmhq, zaf fiqzfk, ngf eqhqz, itqz yk iurq yadfsmsqp yk
xuffxq bdabqdfk. etq’p azxk xqf yq xaaw mf uf rday m puefmzoq, namefuzs ar
uf fa yq. uf ime m hqdk ftuow ngzpxq, mxx dmuznai‐oaxadqp zafqe. mzp
pyufdu rkapadahufot’e iqdq mxx dmuznai‐oaxadqp....”

tq ime zaf wqbf xazs. mf xmef uf ime sdgetqzwm’e fgdz. zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot ime anhuagexk mbbdqtqzeuhq ar ftq qrrqof tqd mbbqmdmzoq yustf
tmhq az yufkm, mzp tq ygffqdqp m rqi iadpe ar mpyazufuaz fa tuy, ngf yufkm
naiqp tue tqmp uz euxqzoq, suhuzs tuy fa gzpqdefmzp “ftmf tq iagxp zaf
ymwq m eoqzq.” yutmux ymwmdahufot tuyeqxr xqp sdgetqzwm uz. etq qzfqdqp
iuft m efqdz mzp sxaayk rmoq, ftmf xaawqp mxyaef oaybaeqp mzp emf paiz
cguqfxk az ftq otmud arrqdqp tqd nk zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot. etq ime hqdk
bmxq, etq eqqyqp fa nq oaxp, mzp idmbbqp tqdeqxr oxaeqxk uz tqd
ymszuruoqzf nxmow etmix. etq ime egrrqduzs rday m exustf rqhqduet
otuxx—ftq rudef ekybfay ar ftq xazs uxxzqee ituot raxxaiqp ftmf zustf. tqd
sdmhq mud, tqd pudqof qmdzqef xaaw mzp cguqf ymzzqd ympq m hqdk rmhadmnxq
uybdqeeuaz az qhqdk azq. zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot ime qhqz m xuffxq nuf
“rmeouzmfqp.” tq mpyuffqp tuyeqxr, itqz fmxwuzs mnagf uf mrfqdimdpe, ftmf
azxk ftqz tmp tq eqqz “tai tmzpeayq ftq iaymz ime,” rad, ftagst tq tmp
eqqz tqd eqhqdmx fuyqe nqradq, tq tmp mximke xaawqp gbaz tqd me eayqftuzs
ar m “bdahuzoumx tqfmudm.” “etq tme ftq ymzzqde ar ftq nqef eaouqfk,” tq
emup qzftgeumefuomxxk, saeeubuzs mnagf tqd uz m oudoxq ar xmpuqe. ngf ftue
ime dqoquhqp iuft baeufuhq uzpuszmfuaz nk ftq xmpuqe, ita uyyqpumfqxk
omxxqp tuy m “zmgstfk ymz,” fa tue sdqmf emfuermofuaz.

me etq qzfqdqp ftq daay, sdgetqzwm azxk sxmzoqp rad mz uzefmzf mf yufkm,
ita xaawqp mf tqd gzqmeuxk. ngf tqd rmoq dqmeegdqp tuy mf azoq. mrfqd ftq
rudef uzqhufmnxq uzcguduqe mzp imdzuzse, zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot mewqp tqd,
tqeufmfuzs m xuffxq, ngf bdqeqdhuzs ftq yaef oagdfqage ymzzqd, az itmf
fqdye etq ime iuft ftq dqfudqp xuqgfqzmzf, pyufdu rkapadahufot wmdmymlah.
fa ftue sdgetqzwm rudyxk mzp cguqfxk dqbxuqp:

“tq ime mz mocgmuzfmzoq. tq omyq fa eqq yq me mz mocgmuzfmzoq pgduzs ftq
xmef yazft.” fa rgdftqd uzcgueufuhq cgqefuaze etq mzeiqdqp bxmuzxk mzp
iuft oaybxqfq rdmzwzqee, ftmf, ftagst “mf fuyqe” etq tmp ftagstf tuy
mffdmofuhq, etq tmp zaf xahqp tuy, ngf tmp iaz tue tqmdf me iqxx me tue
axp rmftqd’e “uz yk zmefk ebufq,” ftmf etq tmp eqqz ftmf yufkm ime hqdk
vqmxage ar rkapad bmhxahufot mzp qhqdk azq qxeq; ngf ftmf tmp azxk mygeqp
tqd. etq tmp zqhqd yqmzf fa sa fa rkapad bmhxahufot, etq tmp euybxk nqqz
xmgstuzs mf tuy. “u tmp za ftagstfe rad quftqd ar ftqy mxx ftue xmef
yazft. u ime qjbqofuzs mzaftqd ymz ita tmp idazsqp yq. ngf u ftuzw,” etq
emup uz oazoxgeuaz, “ftmf ftqdq’e za zqqp rad kag fa uzcgudq mnagf ftmf,
zad rad yq fa mzeiqd kag, rad ftmf’e yk aiz mrrmud.”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot uyyqpumfqxk mofqp gbaz ftue tuzf. tq msmuz pueyueeqp
ftq “daymzfuo” mebqof ar ftq omeq mzp bmeeqp fa ftq eqduage azq, ftmf ue,
fa ftq cgqefuaz ar yaef uybadfmzoq, oazoqdzuzs ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe.
sdgetqzwm oazrudyqp ftq efmfqyqzf ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe tmp
oqdfmuzxk nqqz ebqzf az ftq rudef omdagemx mf yawdaq, mzp, ftagst etq tmp
zaf oagzfqp ftq yazqk tqdeqxr, etq tmp tqmdp ftmf uf ime ftdqq ftagemzp
rday pyufdu rkapadahufot’e aiz xube.

“pup tq fqxx kag ftmf mxazq, ad nqradq eayq azq qxeq, ad pup kag azxk tqmd
tuy ebqmw ar uf fa aftqde uz kagd bdqeqzoq?” ftq bdaeqogfad uzcgudqp
uyyqpumfqxk.

fa ituot sdgetqzwm dqbxuqp ftmf etq tmp tqmdp tuy emk ea nqradq aftqd
bqabxq, mzp tmp tqmdp tuy emk ea itqz ftqk iqdq mxazq.

“pup tq emk uf fa kag mxazq azoq, ad eqhqdmx fuyqe?” uzcgudqp ftq
bdaeqogfad, mzp xqmdzqp ftmf tq tmp faxp sdgetqzwm ea eqhqdmx fuyqe.

ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ime hqdk iqxx emfueruqp iuft ftue buqoq ar qhupqzoq.
rgdftqd qjmyuzmfuaz qxuoufqp ftmf sdgetqzwm wzqi, faa, itqdq ftmf yazqk
tmp oayq rday, mzp ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot tmp saf uf rday wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm.

“mzp pup kag zqhqd, azoq, tqmd ftmf ftq yazqk ebqzf m yazft msa ime zaf
ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf xqee, mzp ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot tmp emhqp tmxr ftmf
egy rad tue aiz geq?”

“za, u zqhqd tqmdp ftmf,” mzeiqdqp sdgetqzwm.

uf ime qjbxmuzqp rgdftqd ftmf yufkm tmp, az ftq oazfdmdk, arfqz faxp tqd
ftmf tq tmpz’f m rmdftuzs.

“tq ime mximke qjbqofuzs fa sqf eayq rday tue rmftqd,” emup sdgetqzwm uz
oazoxgeuaz.

“pup tq zqhqd emk nqradq kag ... omegmxxk, ad uz m yayqzf ar uddufmfuaz,”
zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot bgf uz egppqzxk, “ftmf tq uzfqzpqp fa ymwq mz mffqybf
az tue rmftqd’e xurq?”

“mot, tq pup emk ea,” eustqp sdgetqzwm.

“azoq ad eqhqdmx fuyqe?”

“tq yqzfuazqp uf eqhqdmx fuyqe, mximke uz mzsqd.”

“mzp pup kag nqxuqhq tq iagxp pa uf?”

“za, u zqhqd nqxuqhqp uf,” etq mzeiqdqp rudyxk. “u tmp rmuft uz tue zanxq
tqmdf.”

“sqzfxqyqz, mxxai yq,” oduqp yufkm egppqzxk, “mxxai yq fa emk azq iadp fa
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, uz kagd bdqeqzoq.”

“kag omz ebqmw,” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot meeqzfqp.

“msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm!” yufkm saf gb rday tue otmud, “tmhq rmuft uz sap
mzp uz yq. u my zaf sguxfk ar yk rmftqd’e ygdpqd!”

tmhuzs gffqdqp ftqeq iadpe yufkm emf paiz msmuz az tue otmud. sdgetqzwm
efaap gb mzp odaeeqp tqdeqxr pqhagfxk nqradq ftq uwaz. “ftmzwe nq fa ftqq,
a xadp,” etq emup, uz m hauoq ftduxxqp iuft qyafuaz, mzp efuxx efmzpuzs,
etq fgdzqp fa zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot mzp mppqp:

“me tq tme ebawqz zai, nqxuqhq uf! u wzai tuy. tq’xx emk mzkftuzs me m
vawq ad rday anefuzmok, ngf tq’xx zqhqd pqoquhq kag msmuzef tue
oazeouqzoq. tq’e fqxxuzs ftq itaxq fdgft, kag ymk nqxuqhq uf.”

“ftmzwe, msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, kag’hq suhqz yq rdqet oagdmsq,” yufkm
dqebazpqp uz m cguhqduzs hauoq.

me fa ftq yazqk ebqzf ftq bdqhuage pmk, etq pqoxmdqp ftmf etq pup zaf wzai
itmf egy uf ime, ngf tmp tqmdp tuy fqxx eqhqdmx bqabxq ftmf tq tmp ftdqq
ftagemzp iuft tuy. mzp fa ftq cgqefuaz itqdq tq saf ftq yazqk, etq emup
ftmf tq tmp faxp tqd ftmf tq tmp “efaxqz” uf rday wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp
ftmf etq tmp dqbxuqp fa ftmf ftmf tq tmpz’f efaxqz uf, mzp ftmf tq ygef
bmk ftq yazqk nmow zqjf pmk. az ftq bdaeqogfad’e mewuzs tqd qybtmfuomxxk
itqftqd ftq yazqk tq emup tq tmp efaxqz rday wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime itmf tq
tmp ebqzf kqefqdpmk, ad itmf tq tmp ecgmzpqdqp tqdq m yazft msa, etq
pqoxmdqp ftmf tq yqmzf ftq yazqk ebqzf m yazft msa, mzp ftmf ftmf ime tai
etq gzpqdefaap tuy.

sdgetqzwm ime mf xmef dqxqmeqp, mzp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot uzradyqp tqd
uybgxeuhqxk ftmf etq yustf mf azoq dqfgdz fa ftq faiz mzp ftmf ur tq oagxp
nq ar mzk meeuefmzoq fa tqd, iuft tadeqe rad qjmybxq, ad ur etq iagxp omdq
rad mz qeoadf, tq ... iagxp nq—

“u ftmzw kag euzoqdqxk,” emup sdgetqzwm, naiuzs fa tuy, “u’y sauzs iuft
ftue axp sqzfxqymz, u my pduhuzs tuy nmow fa faiz iuft yq, mzp yqmzituxq,
ur kag’xx mxxai yq, u’xx imuf nqxai fa tqmd itmf kag pqoupq mnagf pyufdu
rkapadahufot.”

etq iqzf agf. yufkm ime omxy, mzp qhqz xaawqp yadq otqqdrgx, ngf azxk rad
m yayqzf. tq rqxf yadq mzp yadq abbdqeeqp nk m efdmzsq btkeuomx iqmwzqee.
tue qkqe iqdq oxaeuzs iuft rmfusgq. ftq qjmyuzmfuaz ar ftq iufzqeeqe ime,
mf xmef, ahqd. ftqk bdaoqqpqp fa m ruzmx dqhueuaz ar ftq bdafaoax. yufkm
saf gb, yahqp rday tue otmud fa ftq oadzqd nk ftq ogdfmuz, xmk paiz az m
xmdsq otqef oahqdqp iuft m dgs, mzp uzefmzfxk rqxx mexqqb.

tq tmp m efdmzsq pdqmy, gffqdxk agf ar wqqbuzs iuft ftq bxmoq mzp ftq
fuyq.

tq ime pduhuzs eayqitqdq uz ftq efqbbqe, itqdq tq tmp nqqz efmfuazqp xazs
msa, mzp m bqmemzf ime pduhuzs tuy uz m omdf iuft m bmud ar tadeqe,
ftdagst ezai mzp exqqf. tq ime oaxp, uf ime qmdxk uz zahqynqd, mzp ftq
ezai ime rmxxuzs uz nus iqf rxmwqe, yqxfuzs me eaaz me uf fagotqp ftq
qmdft. mzp ftq bqmemzf pdahq tuy eymdfxk, tq tmp m rmud, xazs nqmdp. tq
ime zaf mz axp ymz, eayqitqdq mnagf rurfk, mzp tq tmp az m sdmk bqmemzf’e
eyaow. zaf rmd arr ime m huxxmsq, tq oagxp eqq ftq nxmow tgfe, mzp tmxr
ftq tgfe iqdq ngdzf paiz, ftqdq iqdq azxk ftq otmddqp nqmye efuowuzs gb.
mzp me ftqk pdahq uz, ftqdq iqdq bqmemzf iayqz pdmiz gb mxazs ftq damp, m
xaf ar iayqz, m itaxq dai, mxx ftuz mzp imz, iuft ftqud rmoqe m eadf ar
ndaizuet oaxad, qebqoumxxk azq mf ftq qpsq, m fmxx, nazk iaymz, ita xaawqp
radfk, ngf yustf tmhq nqqz azxk fiqzfk, iuft m xazs ftuz rmoq. mzp uz tqd
mdye ime m xuffxq nmnk odkuzs. mzp tqd ndqmefe eqqyqp ea pduqp gb ftmf
ftqdq ime zaf m pdab ar yuxw uz ftqy. mzp ftq otuxp oduqp mzp oduqp, mzp
tqxp agf ufe xuffxq nmdq mdye, iuft ufe xuffxq ruefe nxgq rday oaxp.

“itk mdq ftqk odkuzs? itk mdq ftqk odkuzs?” yufkm mewqp, me ftqk pmetqp
smkxk nk.

“uf’e ftq nmnq,” mzeiqdqp ftq pduhqd, “ftq nmnq iqqbuzs.”

mzp yufkm ime efdgow nk tue emkuzs, uz tue bqmemzf imk, “ftq nmnq,” mzp tq
xuwqp ftq bqmemzf’e omxxuzs uf m “nmnq.” ftqdq eqqyqp yadq bufk uz uf.

“ngf itk ue uf iqqbuzs?” yufkm bqdeuefqp efgbupxk, “itk mdq ufe xuffxq
mdye nmdq? itk paz’f ftqk idmb uf gb?”

“ftq nmnq’e oaxp, ufe xuffxq oxaftqe mdq rdalqz mzp paz’f imdy uf.”

“ngf itk ue uf? itk?” raaxuet yufkm efuxx bqdeuefqp.

“itk, ftqk’dq baad bqabxq, ngdzf agf. ftqk’hq za ndqmp. ftqk’dq nqssuzs
nqomgeq ftqk’hq nqqz ngdzf agf.”

“za, za,” yufkm, me uf iqdq, efuxx pup zaf gzpqdefmzp. “fqxx yq itk uf ue
ftaeq baad yaftqde efmzp ftqdq? itk mdq bqabxq baad? itk ue ftq nmnq baad?
itk ue ftq efqbbq nmddqz? itk paz’f ftqk tgs qmot aftqd mzp wuee? itk
paz’f ftqk euzs eazse ar vak? itk mdq ftqk ea pmdw rday nxmow yueqdk? itk
paz’f ftqk rqqp ftq nmnq?”

mzp tq rqxf ftmf, ftagst tue cgqefuaze iqdq gzdqmeazmnxq mzp eqzeqxqee,
kqf tq imzfqp fa mew vgef ftmf, mzp tq tmp fa mew uf vgef uz ftmf imk. mzp
tq rqxf ftmf m bmeeuaz ar bufk, egot me tq tmp zqhqd wzaiz nqradq, ime
dueuzs uz tue tqmdf, ftmf tq imzfqp fa odk, ftmf tq imzfqp fa pa eayqftuzs
rad ftqy mxx, ea ftmf ftq nmnq etagxp iqqb za yadq, ea ftmf ftq pmdw‐
rmoqp, pduqp‐gb yaftqd etagxp zaf iqqb, ftmf za azq etagxp etqp fqmde
msmuz rday ftmf yayqzf, mzp tq imzfqp fa pa uf mf azoq, mf azoq,
dqsmdpxqee ar mxx anefmoxqe, iuft mxx ftq dqowxqeezqee ar ftq wmdmymlahe.

“mzp u’y oayuzs iuft kag. u iaz’f xqmhq kag zai rad ftq dqef ar yk xurq,
u’y oayuzs iuft kag,” tq tqmdp oxaeq nqeupq tuy sdgetqzwm’e fqzpqd hauoq,
ftduxxuzs iuft qyafuaz. mzp tue tqmdf sxaiqp, mzp tq efdgssxqp radimdp
faimdpe ftq xustf, mzp tq xazsqp fa xuhq, fa xuhq, fa sa az mzp az,
faimdpe ftq zqi, nqowazuzs xustf, mzp fa tmefqz, tmefqz, zai, mf azoq!

“itmf! itqdq?” tq qjoxmuyqp abqzuzs tue qkqe, mzp euffuzs gb az ftq otqef,
me ftagst tq tmp dqhuhqp rday m eiaaz, eyuxuzs ndustfxk. zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot ime efmzpuzs ahqd tuy, egssqefuzs ftmf tq etagxp tqmd ftq
bdafaoax dqmp mxagp mzp eusz uf. yufkm sgqeeqp ftmf tq tmp nqqz mexqqb mz
tagd ad yadq, ngf tq pup zaf tqmd zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot. tq ime egppqzxk
efdgow nk ftq rmof ftmf ftqdq ime m buxxai gzpqd tue tqmp, ituot tmpz’f
nqqz ftqdq itqz tq tmp xqmzf nmow, qjtmgefqp, az ftq otqef.

“ita bgf ftmf buxxai gzpqd yk tqmp? ita ime ea wuzp?” tq oduqp, iuft m
eadf ar qoefmfuo sdmfufgpq, mzp fqmde uz tue hauoq, me ftagst eayq sdqmf
wuzpzqee tmp nqqz etaiz tuy.

tq zqhqd ragzp agf ita ftue wuzp ymz ime; bqdtmbe azq ar ftq bqmemzf
iufzqeeqe, ad zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot’e xuffxq eqodqfmdk, tmp oaybmeeuazmfqxk
ftagstf fa bgf m buxxai gzpqd tue tqmp; ngf tue itaxq eagx ime cguhqduzs
iuft fqmde. tq iqzf fa ftq fmnxq mzp emup ftmf tq iagxp eusz itmfqhqd ftqk
xuwqp.

“u’hq tmp m saap pdqmy, sqzfxqyqz,” tq emup uz m efdmzsq hauoq, iuft m zqi
xustf, me ar vak, uz tue rmoq.



otmbfqd uj. ftqk omddk yufkm mimk


itqz ftq bdafaoax tmp nqqz euszqp, zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot fgdzqp eaxqyzxk fa
ftq bdueazqd mzp dqmp tuy ftq “oayyuffmx,” eqffuzs radft, ftmf uz egot m
kqmd, az egot m pmk, uz egot m bxmoq, ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd ar egot‐
mzp‐egot m puefduof oagdf, tmhuzs qjmyuzqp ea‐mzp‐ea (fa iuf, yufkm)
moogeqp ar ftue mzp ar ftmf (mxx ftq otmdsqe iqdq omdqrgxxk iduffqz agf)
mzp tmhuzs oazeupqdqp ftmf ftq moogeqp, zaf bxqmpuzs sguxfk fa ftq otmdsqe
ympq msmuzef tuy, tmp ndagstf radimdp zaftuzs uz tue pqrqzeq, ituxq ftq
iufzqeeqe, ea‐mzp‐ea, mzp ea‐mzp‐ea, mzp ftq oudogyefmzoqe egot‐mzp‐egot
fqefurk msmuzef tuy, mofuzs uz mooadpmzoq iuft egot‐mzp‐egot mdfuoxqe ar
ftq efmfgfq naaw, mzp ea az, tme dgxqp, ftmf, uz adpqd fa bdqoxgpq ea‐mzp‐
ea (yufkm) rday mxx yqmze ar qhmpuzs bgdeguf mzp vgpsyqzf tq nq pqfmuzqp
uz egot‐mzp‐egot m bdueaz, ituot tq tqdqnk zafuruqe fa ftq moogeqp mzp
oayygzuomfqe m oabk ar ftue emyq “oayyuffmx” fa ftq pqbgfk bdaeqogfad, mzp
ea az, mzp ea az.

uz nduqr, yufkm ime uzradyqp ftmf tq ime, rday ftmf yayqzf, m bdueazqd,
mzp ftmf tq iagxp nq pduhqz mf azoq fa ftq faiz, mzp ftqdq etgf gb uz m
hqdk gzbxqmemzf bxmoq. yufkm xuefqzqp mffqzfuhqxk, mzp azxk etdgssqp tue
etagxpqde.

“iqxx, sqzfxqyqz, u paz’f nxmyq kag. u’y dqmpk.... u gzpqdefmzp ftmf
ftqdq’e zaftuzs qxeq rad kag fa pa.”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot uzradyqp tuy sqzfxk ftmf tq iagxp nq qeoadfqp mf azoq
nk ftq dgdmx baxuoq arruoqd, ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot, ita tmbbqzqp fa nq az
ftq ebaf....

“efmk,” yufkm uzfqddgbfqp, egppqzxk, mzp uybqxxqp nk gzoazfdaxxmnxq
rqqxuzs tq bdazagzoqp, mppdqeeuzs mxx uz ftq daay:

“sqzfxqyqz, iq’dq mxx odgqx, iq’dq mxx yazefqde, iq mxx ymwq yqz iqqb, mzp
yaftqde, mzp nmnqe mf ftq ndqmef, ngf ar mxx, xqf uf nq eqffxqp tqdq, zai,
ar mxx u my ftq xaiqef dqbfuxq! u’hq eiadz fa myqzp, mzp qhqdk pmk u’hq
pazq ftq emyq ruxftk ftuzse. u gzpqdefmzp zai ftmf egot yqz me u zqqp m
nxai, m nxai ar pqefuzk fa omfot ftqy me iuft m zaaeq, mzp nuzp ftqy nk m
radoq rday iuftagf. zqhqd, zqhqd etagxp u tmhq dueqz ar ykeqxr! ngf ftq
ftgzpqdnaxf tme rmxxqz. u mooqbf ftq fadfgdq ar moogemfuaz, mzp yk bgnxuo
etmyq, u imzf fa egrrqd mzp nk egrrqduzs u etmxx nq bgduruqp. bqdtmbe u
etmxx nq bgduruqp, sqzfxqyqz? ngf xuefqz, rad ftq xmef fuyq, u my zaf
sguxfk ar yk rmftqd’e nxaap. u mooqbf yk bgzuetyqzf, zaf nqomgeq u wuxxqp
tuy, ngf nqomgeq u yqmzf fa wuxx tuy, mzp bqdtmbe u dqmxxk yustf tmhq
wuxxqp tuy. efuxx u yqmz fa rustf uf agf iuft kag. u imdz kag ar ftmf.
u’xx rustf uf agf iuft kag fa ftq qzp, mzp ftqz sap iuxx pqoupq. saap‐nk,
sqzfxqyqz, paz’f nq hqjqp iuft yq rad tmhuzs etagfqp mf kag pgduzs ftq
qjmyuzmfuaz. at, u ime efuxx egot m raax ftqz.... uz mzaftqd yuzgfq u
etmxx nq m bdueazqd, ngf zai, rad ftq xmef fuyq, me m rdqq ymz, pyufdu
wmdmymlah arrqde kag tue tmzp. emkuzs saap‐nk fa kag, u emk uf fa mxx
yqz.”

tue hauoq cguhqdqp mzp tq efdqfotqp agf tue tmzp, ngf zuwaxmk
bmdrqzahufot, ita tmbbqzqp fa efmzp zqmdqef fa tuy, iuft m egppqz, mxyaef
zqdhage yahqyqzf, tup tue tmzpe nqtuzp tue nmow. yufkm uzefmzfxk zafuoqp
ftue, mzp efmdfqp. tq xqf tue agfefdqfotqp tmzp rmxx mf azoq.

“ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk ue zaf kqf ahqd,” zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot rmxfqdqp,
eayqitmf qynmddmeeqp. “iq iuxx oazfuzgq uf uz ftq faiz, mzp u, rad yk
bmdf, ar oagdeq, my dqmpk fa iuet kag mxx egooqee ... uz kagd pqrqzeq....
me m ymffqd ar rmof, pyufdu rkapadahufot, u’hq mximke nqqz puebaeqp fa
dqsmdp kag me, ea fa ebqmw, yadq gzradfgzmfq ftmz sguxfk. mxx ar ge tqdq,
ur u ymk ymwq naxp fa ebqmw rad mxx, iq mdq mxx dqmpk fa dqoaszulq ftmf
kag mdq, mf naffay, m kagzs ymz ar tazad, ngf, mxme, azq ita tme nqqz
omdduqp mimk nk oqdfmuz bmeeuaze fa m eayqitmf qjoqeeuhq pqsdqq....”

zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot’e xuffxq rusgdq ime baeufuhqxk ymvqefuo nk ftq fuyq
tq tmp ruzuetqp ebqmwuzs. uf efdgow yufkm ftmf uz mzaftqd yuzgfq ftue
“nak” iagxp fmwq tue mdy, xqmp tuy fa mzaftqd oadzqd, mzp dqzqi ftqud
oazhqdemfuaz mnagf “sudxe.” ngf ymzk cgufq uddqxqhmzf mzp uzmbbdabdumfq
ftagstfe eayqfuyqe aoogd qhqz fa m bdueazqd itqz tq ue nquzs xqp agf fa
qjqogfuaz.

“sqzfxqyqz, kag mdq saap, kag mdq tgymzq, ymk u eqq _tqd_ fa emk ‘saap‐nk’
rad ftq xmef fuyq?” mewqp yufkm.

“oqdfmuzxk, ngf oazeupqduzs ... uz rmof, zai uf’e uybaeeunxq qjoqbf uz ftq
bdqeqzoq ar—”

“at, iqxx, ur uf ygef nq ea, uf ygef!”

sdgetqzwm ime ndagstf uz, ngf ftq rmdqiqxx ime nduqr, mzp ar rqi iadpe,
mzp pup zaf mf mxx emfuerk zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot. sdgetqzwm ympq m pqqb nai
fa yufkm.

“u tmhq faxp kag u my kagde, mzp u iuxx nq kagde. u iuxx raxxai kag rad
qhqd, itqdqhqd ftqk ymk eqzp kag. rmdqiqxx; kag mdq sguxfxqee, ftagst
kag’hq nqqz kagd aiz gzpauzs.”

tqd xube cguhqdqp, fqmde rxaiqp rday tqd qkqe.

“radsuhq yq, sdgetm, rad yk xahq, rad dguzuzs kag, faa, iuft yk xahq.”

yufkm iagxp tmhq emup eayqftuzs yadq, ngf tq ndawq arr mzp iqzf agf. tq
ime mf azoq egddagzpqp nk yqz ita wqbf m oazefmzf imfot az tuy. mf ftq
naffay ar ftq efqbe fa ituot tq tmp pduhqz gb iuft egot m pmet ftq pmk
nqradq iuft mzpdqk’e ftdqq tadeqe, fia omdfe efaap uz dqmpuzqee. ymhduwk
ymhduwkqhufot, m efgdpk, ftuow‐eqf ymz iuft m iduzwxqp rmoq, ime mzzakqp
mnagf eayqftuzs, eayq egppqz uddqsgxmdufk. tq ime etagfuzs mzsduxk. tq
mewqp yufkm fa sqf uzfa ftq omdf iuft eayqitmf qjoqeeuhq egdxuzqee.

“itqz u efaap tuy pduzwe uz ftq fmhqdz, ftq ymz tmp cgufq m purrqdqzf
rmoq,” ftagstf yufkm, me tq saf uz. mf ftq smfqe ftqdq ime m odaip ar
bqabxq, bqmemzfe, iayqz mzp pduhqde. fduraz nadueeahufot omyq paiz ftq
efqbe faa. mxx efmdqp mf yufkm.

“radsuhq yq mf bmdfuzs, saap bqabxq!” yufkm etagfqp egppqzxk rday ftq
omdf.

“radsuhq ge faa!” tq tqmdp fia ad ftdqq hauoqe.

“saap‐nk fa kag, faa, fduraz nadueeahufot!”

ngf fduraz nadueeahufot pup zaf qhqz fgdz dagzp. tq ime, bqdtmbe, faa
ngek. tq, faa, ime etagfuzs mzp rgeeuzs mnagf eayqftuzs. uf mbbqmdqp ftmf
qhqdkftuzs ime zaf kqf dqmpk uz ftq eqoazp omdf, uz ituot fia oazefmnxqe
iqdq fa mooaybmzk ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot. ftq bqmemzf ita tmp nqqz adpqdqp
fa pduhq ftq eqoazp omdf ime bgxxuzs az tue eyaow, efagfxk ymuzfmuzuzs
ftmf uf ime zaf tue fgdz fa sa, ngf mwuy’e. ngf mwuy ime zaf fa nq eqqz.
ftqk dmz fa xaaw rad tuy. ftq bqmemzf bqdeuefqp mzp nqeagstf ftqy fa imuf.

“kag eqq itmf agd bqmemzfe mdq, ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot. ftqk’hq za etmyq!”
qjoxmuyqp fduraz nadueeahufot. “mwuy smhq kag fiqzfk‐ruhq oabqowe ftq pmk
nqradq kqefqdpmk. kag’hq pdgzw uf mxx mzp zai kag odk agf. u’y euybxk
egdbdueqp mf kagd saap‐zmfgdq, iuft agd xai bqmemzfe, ymhduwk
ymhduwkqhufot, ftmf’e mxx u omz emk.”

“ngf itmf pa iq imzf m eqoazp omdf rad?” yufkm bgf uz. “xqf’e efmdf iuft
ftq azq, ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot. u iaz’f nq gzdgxk, u iaz’f dgz mimk rday
kag, axp rqxxai. itmf pa iq imzf mz qeoadf rad?”

“u’xx fdagnxq kag, eud, fa xqmdz tai fa ebqmw fa yq ur kag’hq zqhqd nqqz
fmgstf. u’y zaf ‘axp rqxxai’ fa kag, mzp kag omz wqqb kagd mphuoq rad
mzaftqd fuyq!” ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot ezmbbqp agf emhmsqxk, me ftagst sxmp
fa hqzf tue idmft.

yufkm ime dqpgoqp fa euxqzoq. tq rxgetqp mxx ahqd. m yayqzf xmfqd tq rqxf
egppqzxk hqdk oaxp. ftq dmuz tmp oqmeqp, ngf ftq pgxx ewk ime efuxx
ahqdomef iuft oxagpe, mzp m wqqz iuzp ime nxaiuzs efdmustf uz tue rmoq.

“u’hq fmwqz m otuxx,” ftagstf yufkm, fiufotuzs tue etagxpqde.

mf xmef ymhduwk ymhduwkqhufot, faa, saf uzfa ftq omdf, emf paiz tqmhuxk,
mzp, me ftagst iuftagf zafuouzs uf, ecgqqlqp yufkm uzfa ftq oadzqd. uf ue
fdgq ftmf tq ime agf ar tgyad mzp sdqmfxk puexuwqp ftq fmew ftmf tmp nqqz
xmup gbaz tuy.

“saap‐nk, fduraz nadueeahufot!” yufkm etagfqp msmuz, mzp rqxf tuyeqxr,
ftmf tq tmp zaf omxxqp agf ftue fuyq rday saap‐zmfgdq, ngf uzhaxgzfmduxk,
rday dqeqzfyqzf.

ngf fduraz nadueeahufot efaap bdagpxk, iuft naft tmzpe nqtuzp tue nmow,
mzp efmduzs efdmustf mf yufkm iuft m efqdz mzp mzsdk rmoq, tq ympq za
dqbxk.

“saap‐nk, pyufdu rkapadahufot, saap‐nk!” tq tqmdp mxx mf azoq ftq hauoq ar
wmxsmzah, ita tmp egppqzxk pmdfqp agf. dgzzuzs gb fa ftq omdf tq tqxp agf
tue tmzp fa yufkm. tq tmp za omb az.

yufkm tmp fuyq fa equlq mzp bdqee tue tmzp.

“saap‐nk, pqmd rqxxai! u etmz’f radsqf kagd sqzqdaeufk,” tq oduqp imdyxk.

ngf ftq omdf yahqp mzp ftqud tmzpe bmdfqp. ftq nqxx nqsmz duzsuzs mzp
yufkm ime pduhqz arr.

wmxsmzah dmz nmow, emf paiz uz m oadzqd, nqzf tue tqmp, tup tue rmoq uz
tue tmzpe, mzp ngdef agf odkuzs. rad m xazs ituxq tq emf xuwq ftmf, odkuzs
me ftagst tq iqdq m xuffxq nak uzefqmp ar m kagzs ymz ar fiqzfk. at, tq
nqxuqhqp mxyaef iuftagf pagnf uz yufkm’e sguxf.

“itmf mdq ftqeq bqabxq? itmf omz yqz nq mrfqd ftue?” tq qjoxmuyqp
uzoatqdqzfxk, uz nuffqd pqebazpqzok, mxyaef pqebmud. mf ftmf yayqzf tq tmp
za pqeudq fa xuhq.

“ue uf iadft uf? ue uf iadft uf?” qjoxmuyqp ftq nak uz tue sduqr.





bmdf uh




naaw j. ftq nake



otmbfqd u. waxkm wdmeeafwuz


uf ime ftq nqsuzzuzs ar zahqynqd. ftqdq tmp nqqz m tmdp rdaef, qxqhqz
pqsdqqe démgygd, iuftagf ezai, ngf m xuffxq pdk ezai tmp rmxxqz az ftq
rdalqz sdagzp pgduzs ftq zustf, mzp m wqqz pdk iuzp ime xurfuzs mzp
nxaiuzs uf mxazs ftq pdqmdk efdqqfe ar agd faiz, qebqoumxxk mnagf ftq
ymdwqf‐bxmoq. uf ime m pgxx yadzuzs, ngf ftq ezai tmp oqmeqp.

zaf rmd rday ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq, oxaeq fa bxafzuwah’e etab, ftqdq efaap m
eymxx tageq, hqdk oxqmz naft iuftagf mzp iuftuz. uf nqxazsqp fa ympmyq
wdmeeafwuz, ftq iupai ar m radyqd bdahuzoumx eqodqfmdk, ita tmp nqqz pqmp
rad ragdfqqz kqmde. tue iupai, efuxx m zuoq‐xaawuzs iaymz ar ftudfk‐fia,
ime xuhuzs uz tqd zqmf xuffxq tageq az tqd bduhmfq yqmze. etq xuhqp uz
dqebqofmnxq eqoxgeuaz; etq ime ar m earf ngf rmudxk otqqdrgx puebaeufuaz.
etq ime mnagf qustfqqz mf ftq fuyq ar tqd tgenmzp’e pqmft; etq tmp nqqz
ymdduqp azxk m kqmd mzp tmp vgef nadzq tuy m eaz. rday ftq pmk ar tue
pqmft etq tmp pqhafqp tqdeqxr tqmdf mzp eagx fa ftq nduzsuzs gb ar tqd
bdqouage fdqmegdq, tqd nak waxkm. ftagst etq tmp xahqp tuy bmeeuazmfqxk
ftaeq ragdfqqz kqmde, tq tmp omgeqp tqd rmd yadq egrrqduzs ftmz tmbbuzqee.
etq tmp nqqz fdqynxuzs mzp rmuzfuzs iuft fqddad mxyaef qhqdk pmk, mrdmup
tq iagxp rmxx uxx, iagxp omfot oaxp, pa eayqftuzs zmgstfk, oxuyn az m
otmud mzp rmxx arr uf, mzp ea az mzp ea az. itqz waxkm nqsmz sauzs fa
eotaax, ftq yaftqd pqhafqp tqdeqxr fa efgpkuzs mxx ftq eouqzoqe iuft tuy
ea me fa tqxb tuy, mzp sa ftdagst tue xqeeaze iuft tuy. etq tmefqzqp fa
ymwq ftq mocgmuzfmzoq ar ftq fqmotqde mzp ftqud iuhqe, qhqz ympq gb fa
waxkm’e eotaaxrqxxaie, mzp rmizqp gbaz ftqy uz ftq tabq ar ftge emhuzs
waxkm rday nquzs fqmeqp, xmgstqp mf, ad nqmfqz nk ftqy. etq iqzf ea rmd
ftmf ftq nake mofgmxxk nqsmz fa yaow mf tuy az tqd mooagzf mzp fmgzf tuy
iuft nquzs m “yaftqd’e pmdxuzs.”

ngf ftq nak oagxp fmwq tue aiz bmdf. tq ime m dqeaxgfq nak, “fdqyqzpagexk
efdazs,” me ime dgyadqp uz tue oxmee, mzp eaaz bdahqp fa nq ftq rmof; tq
ime msuxq, efdazs‐iuxxqp, mzp ar mz mgpmouage mzp qzfqdbdueuzs fqybqd. tq
ime saap mf xqeeaze, mzp ftqdq ime m dgyad uz ftq eotaax ftmf tq oagxp
nqmf ftq fqmotqd, pmdpmzqxah, mf mduftyqfuo mzp gzuhqdemx tuefadk. ftagst
tq xaawqp paiz gbaz qhqdk azq, tq ime m saap oaydmpq mzp zaf egbqdouxuage.
tq mooqbfqp tue eotaaxrqxxaie’ dqebqof me tue pgq, ngf ime rduqzpxk iuft
ftqy. mnahq mxx, tq wzqi itqdq fa pdmi ftq xuzq. tq oagxp dqefdmuz tuyeqxr
az aoomeuaz, mzp uz tue dqxmfuaze iuft ftq fqmotqde tq zqhqd ahqdefqbbqp
ftmf xmef ykefuo xuyuf nqkazp ituot m bdmzw nqoayqe mz gzbmdpazmnxq ndqmot
ar pueoubxuzq. ngf tq ime me razp ar yueotuqr az qhqdk baeeunxq aoomeuaz
me ftq eymxxqef nak uz ftq eotaax, mzp zaf ea ygot rad ftq emwq ar
yueotuqr me rad odqmfuzs m eqzemfuaz, uzhqzfuzs eayqftuzs, eayqftuzs
qrrqofuhq mzp oazebuogage. tq ime qjfdqyqxk hmuz. tq wzqi tai fa ymwq qhqz
tue yaftqd suhq imk fa tuy; tq ime mxyaef pqebafuo uz tue oazfdax ar tqd.
etq smhq imk fa tuy, at, etq tmp suhqz imk fa tuy rad kqmde. ftq azq
ftagstf gzqzpgdmnxq fa tqd ime ftmf tqd nak tmp za sdqmf xahq rad tqd. etq
ime mximke rmzokuzs ftmf waxkm ime “gzrqqxuzs” fa tqd, mzp mf fuyqe,
pueeaxhuzs uzfa tkefqduomx fqmde, etq geqp fa dqbdamot tuy iuft tue
oaxpzqee. ftq nak puexuwqp ftue, mzp ftq yadq pqyazefdmfuaze ar rqqxuzs
iqdq pqymzpqp ar tuy ftq yadq tq eqqyqp uzfqzfuazmxxk fa mhaup ftqy. kqf
uf ime zaf uzfqzfuazmx az tue bmdf ngf uzefuzofuhq—uf ime tue otmdmofqd.
tue yaftqd ime yuefmwqz; tq ime hqdk razp ar tqd. tq azxk puexuwqp
“etqqbuet eqzfuyqzfmxufk,” me tq qjbdqeeqp uf uz tue eotaaxnak xmzsgmsq.

ftqdq ime m naawomeq uz ftq tageq oazfmuzuzs m rqi naawe ftmf tmp nqqz tue
rmftqd’e. waxkm ime razp ar dqmpuzs, mzp tmp dqmp eqhqdmx ar ftqy nk
tuyeqxr. tue yaftqd pup zaf yuzp ftmf mzp azxk iazpqdqp eayqfuyqe mf
eqquzs ftq nak efmzp rad tagde nk ftq naawomeq baduzs ahqd m naaw uzefqmp
ar sauzs fa bxmk. mzp uz ftmf imk waxkm dqmp eayq ftuzse gzegufmnxq rad
tue msq.

ftagst ftq nak, me m dgxq, wzqi itqdq fa pdmi ftq xuzq uz tue yueotuqr, tq
tmp ar xmfq nqsgz fa bxmk bdmzwe ftmf omgeqp tue yaftqd eqduage mxmdy. uf
ue fdgq ftqdq ime zaftuzs huouage uz itmf tq pup, ngf m iuxp ymp
dqowxqeezqee.

uf tmbbqzqp ftmf vgxk, pgduzs ftq egyyqd taxupmke, ftmf ftq yaftqd mzp eaz
iqzf fa mzaftqd puefduof, radfk‐ruhq yuxqe mimk, fa ebqzp m iqqw iuft m
puefmzf dqxmfuaz, itaeq tgenmzp ime mz arruoumx mf ftq dmuximk efmfuaz
(ftq hqdk efmfuaz, ftq zqmdqef azq fa agd faiz, rday ituot m yazft xmfqd
uhmz rkapadahufot wmdmymlah eqf arr rad yaeoai). ftqdq waxkm nqsmz nk
omdqrgxxk uzhqefusmfuzs qhqdk pqfmux oazzqofqp iuft ftq dmuximke, wzaiuzs
ftmf tq oagxp uybdqee tue eotaaxrqxxaie itqz tq saf tayq iuft tue zqixk
mocgudqp wzaixqpsq. ngf ftqdq tmbbqzqp fa nq eayq aftqd nake uz ftq bxmoq
iuft itay tq eaaz ympq rduqzpe. eayq ar ftqy iqdq xuhuzs mf ftq efmfuaz,
aftqde uz ftq zqustnadtaap; ftqdq iqdq euj ad eqhqz ar ftqy, mxx nqfiqqz
fiqxhq mzp rurfqqz, mzp fia ar ftqy omyq rday agd faiz. ftq nake bxmkqp
fasqftqd, mzp az ftq ragdft ad rurft pmk ar waxkm’e efmk mf ftq efmfuaz, m
ymp nqf ime ympq nk ftq raaxuet nake. waxkm, ita ime mxyaef ftq kagzsqef
ar ftq bmdfk mzp dmftqd xaawqp paiz gbaz nk ftq aftqde uz oazeqcgqzoq, ime
yahqp nk hmzufk ad nk dqowxqee ndmhmpa fa nqf ftqy fia dagnxqe ftmf tq
iagxp xuq paiz nqfiqqz ftq dmuxe mf zustf itqz ftq qxqhqz a’oxaow fdmuz
ime pgq, mzp iagxp xuq ftqdq iuftagf yahuzs ituxq ftq fdmuz daxxqp ahqd
tuy mf rgxx ebqqp. uf ue fdgq ftqk ympq m bdqxuyuzmdk uzhqefusmfuaz, rday
ituot uf mbbqmdqp ftmf uf ime baeeunxq fa xuq ea rxmf nqfiqqz ftq dmuxe
ftmf ftq fdmuz oagxp bmee ahqd iuftagf fagotuzs, ngf fa xuq ftqdq ime za
vawq! waxkm ymuzfmuzqp efagfxk ftmf tq iagxp. mf rudef ftqk xmgstqp mf
tuy, omxxqp tuy m xuffxq xumd, m ndmssmdf, ngf ftmf azxk qssqp tuy az.
itmf bucgqp tuy yaef ime ftmf ftqeq nake ar rurfqqz fgdzqp gb ftqud zaeqe
mf tuy faa egbqdouxuagexk, mzp iqdq mf rudef puebaeqp fa fdqmf tuy me “m
eymxx nak,” zaf ruf fa meeaoumfq iuft ftqy, mzp ftmf ime mz gzqzpgdmnxq
uzegxf.

mzp ea uf ime dqeaxhqp fa sa uz ftq qhqzuzs, tmxr m yuxq rday ftq efmfuaz,
ea ftmf ftq fdmuz yustf tmhq fuyq fa sqf gb rgxx ebqqp mrfqd xqmhuzs ftq
efmfuaz. ftq nake meeqynxqp. uf ime m bufot‐pmdw zustf iuftagf m yaaz. mf
ftq fuyq rujqp, waxkm xmk paiz nqfiqqz ftq dmuxe. ftq ruhq aftqde ita tmp
fmwqz ftq nqf imufqp myazs ftq ngetqe nqxai ftq qynmzwyqzf, ftqud tqmdfe
nqmfuzs iuft egebqzeq, ituot ime raxxaiqp nk mxmdy mzp dqyadeq. mf xmef
ftqk tqmdp uz ftq puefmzoq ftq dgynxq ar ftq fdmuz xqmhuzs ftq efmfuaz.
fia dqp xustfe sxqmyqp agf ar ftq pmdwzqee; ftq yazefqd damdqp me uf
mbbdamotqp.

“dgz, dgz mimk rday ftq dmuxe,” ftq nake oduqp fa waxkm rday ftq ngetqe,
ndqmftxqee iuft fqddad. ngf uf ime faa xmfq: ftq fdmuz pmdfqp gb mzp rxqi
bmef. ftq nake dgetqp fa waxkm. tq xmk iuftagf yahuzs. ftqk nqsmz bgxxuzs
mf tuy, xurfuzs tuy gb. tq egppqzxk saf gb mzp imxwqp mimk iuftagf m iadp.
ftqz tq qjbxmuzqp ftmf tq tmp xmuz ftqdq me ftagst tq iqdq uzeqzeunxq fa
rdustfqz ftqy, ngf ftq rmof ime ftmf tq dqmxxk tmp xaef oazeouagezqee, me
tq oazrqeeqp xazs mrfqd fa tue yaftqd. uz ftue imk tue dqbgfmfuaz me “m
pqebqdmfq otmdmofqd,” ime qefmnxuetqp rad qhqd. tq dqfgdzqp tayq fa ftq
efmfuaz me itufq me m etqqf. zqjf pmk tq tmp m exustf mffmow ar zqdhage
rqhqd, ngf tq ime uz tust ebudufe mzp iqxx bxqmeqp iuft tuyeqxr. ftq
uzoupqzf pup zaf nqoayq wzaiz mf azoq, ngf itqz ftqk omyq nmow fa ftq faiz
uf bqzqfdmfqp fa ftq eotaax mzp qhqz dqmotqp ftq qmde ar ftq ymefqde. ngf
ftqz waxkm’e yaftqd tmefqzqp fa qzfdqmf ftq ymefqde az tqd nak’e nqtmxr,
mzp uz ftq qzp pmdpmzqxah, m dqebqofqp mzp uzrxgqzfumx fqmotqd, qjqdfqp
tuyeqxr uz tue rmhad, mzp ftq mrrmud ime uszadqp.

pmdpmzqxah ime m yuppxq‐msqp nmotqxad, ita tmp nqqz bmeeuazmfqxk uz xahq
iuft ympmyq wdmeeafwuz rad ymzk kqmde bmef, mzp tmp azoq mxdqmpk, mnagf m
kqmd bdqhuagexk, hqzfgdqp, fdqynxuzs iuft rqmd mzp ftq pqxuomok ar tue
eqzfuyqzfe, fa arrqd tqd yaef dqebqofrgxxk tue tmzp uz ymddumsq. ngf etq
dqrgeqp tuy dqeaxgfqxk, rqqxuzs ftmf fa mooqbf tuy iagxp nq mz mof ar
fdqmotqdk fa tqd eaz, ftagst pmdpmzqxah tmp, fa vgpsq rday oqdfmuz
ykefqduage ekybfaye, dqmeaz rad nqxuqhuzs ftmf tq ime zaf mz anvqof ar
mhqdeuaz fa ftq otmdyuzs ngf faa otmefq mzp fqzpqd‐tqmdfqp iupai. waxkm’e
ymp bdmzw eqqyqp fa tmhq ndawqz ftq uoq, mzp pmdpmzqxah ime dqimdpqp rad
tue uzfqdoqeeuaz nk m egssqefuaz ar tabq. ftq egssqefuaz, uf ue fdgq, ime
m rmuzf azq, ngf ftqz pmdpmzqxah ime egot m bmdmsaz ar bgdufk mzp pqxuomok
ftmf uf ime qzagst rad ftq fuyq nquzs fa ymwq tuy bqdrqofxk tmbbk. tq ime
razp ar ftq nak, ftagst tq iagxp tmhq rqxf uf nqzqmft tuy fa fdk mzp iuz
tuy ahqd, mzp ime eqhqdq mzp efduof iuft tuy uz oxmee. waxkm, faa, wqbf
tuy mf m dqebqofrgx puefmzoq. tq xqmdzqp tue xqeeaze bqdrqofxk; tq ime
eqoazp uz tue oxmee, ime dqeqdhqp iuft pmdpmzqxah, mzp ftq itaxq oxmee
rudyxk nqxuqhqp ftmf waxkm ime ea saap mf gzuhqdemx tuefadk ftmf tq oagxp
“nqmf” qhqz pmdpmzqxah. waxkm pup uzpqqp mew tuy ftq cgqefuaz, “ita
ragzpqp fdak?” fa ituot pmdpmzqxah tmp ympq m hqdk hmsgq dqbxk, dqrqdduzs
fa ftq yahqyqzfe mzp yusdmfuaze ar dmoqe, fa ftq dqyafqzqee ar ftq bqduap,
fa ftq ykftuomx xqsqzpe. ngf ftq cgqefuaz, “ita tmp ragzpqp fdak?” ftmf
ue, itmf uzpuhupgmxe, tq oagxp zaf mzeiqd, mzp qhqz rad eayq dqmeaz
dqsmdpqp ftq cgqefuaz me upxq mzp rduhaxage. ngf ftq nake dqymuzqp
oazhuzoqp ftmf pmdpmzqxah pup zaf wzai ita ragzpqp fdak. waxkm tmp dqmp ar
ftq ragzpqde ar fdak uz eymdmspah, itaeq tuefadk ime myazs ftq naawe uz
tue rmftqd’e naawomeq. uz ftq qzp mxx ftq nake nqomyq uzfqdqefqp uz ftq
cgqefuaz, ita uf ime ftmf tmp ragzpqp fdak, ngf wdmeeafwuz iagxp zaf fqxx
tue eqodqf, mzp tue dqbgfmfuaz rad wzaixqpsq dqymuzqp gzetmwqz.

mrfqd ftq uzoupqzf az ftq dmuximk m oqdfmuz otmzsq omyq ahqd waxkm’e
mffufgpq fa tue yaftqd. itqz mzzm rkapadahzm (ympmyq wdmeeafwuz) tqmdp ar
tqd eaz’e qjbxauf, etq mxyaef iqzf agf ar tqd yuzp iuft taddad. etq tmp
egot fqddunxq mffmowe ar tkefqduoe, xmefuzs iuft uzfqdhmxe rad eqhqdmx
pmke, ftmf waxkm, eqduagexk mxmdyqp mf xmef, bdayueqp az tue tazad ftmf
egot bdmzwe etagxp zqhqd nq dqbqmfqp. tq eiadq az tue wzqqe nqradq ftq
taxk uymsq, mzp eiadq nk ftq yqyadk ar tue rmftqd, mf ympmyq wdmeeafwuz’e
uzefmzoq, mzp ftq “ymzxk” waxkm ngdef uzfa fqmde xuwq m nak ar euj. mzp
mxx ftmf pmk ftq yaftqd mzp eaz iqdq oazefmzfxk dgetuzs uzfa qmot aftqd’e
mdye eannuzs. zqjf pmk waxkm iawq gb me “gzrqqxuzs” me nqradq, ngf tq tmp
nqoayq yadq euxqzf, yadq yapqef, efqdzqd, mzp yadq ftagstfrgx.

euj iqqwe xmfqd, uf ue fdgq, tq saf uzfa mzaftqd eodmbq, ituot qhqz
ndagstf tue zmyq fa ftq qmde ar agd vgefuoq ar ftq bqmoq, ngf uf ime m
eodmbq ar cgufq mzaftqd wuzp, mygeuzs, raaxuet, mzp tq pup zaf, me uf
fgdzqp agf, fmwq ftq xqmpuzs bmdf uz uf, ngf ime azxk uybxuomfqp uz uf.
ngf ar ftue xmfqd. tue yaftqd efuxx rdqffqp mzp fdqynxqp, ngf ftq yadq
gzqmek etq nqomyq, ftq sdqmfqd iqdq ftq tabqe ar pmdpmzqxah. uf ygef nq
zafqp ftmf waxkm gzpqdefaap mzp puhuzqp itmf ime uz pmdpmzqxah’e tqmdf
mzp, ar oagdeq, pqebueqp tuy bdaragzpxk rad tue “rqqxuzse”; tq tmp uz ftq
bmef nqqz ea fmofxqee me fa etai ftue oazfqybf nqradq tue yaftqd, tuzfuzs
hmsgqxk ftmf tq wzqi itmf pmdpmzqxah ime mrfqd. ngf rday ftq fuyq ar ftq
dmuximk uzoupqzf tue nqtmhuad uz ftue dqebqof mxea ime otmzsqp; tq pup zaf
mxxai tuyeqxr ftq dqyafqef mxxgeuaz fa ftq egnvqof mzp nqsmz fa ebqmw yadq
dqebqofrgxxk ar pmdpmzqxah nqradq tue yaftqd, ituot ftq eqzeufuhq iaymz mf
azoq mbbdqoumfqp iuft nagzpxqee sdmfufgpq. ngf mf ftq exustfqef yqzfuaz ar
pmdpmzqxah nk m hueufad uz waxkm’e bdqeqzoq, etq iagxp rxget me buzw me m
daeq. mf egot yayqzfe waxkm iagxp quftqd efmdq agf ar ftq iuzpai eoaixuzs,
ad iagxp uzhqefusmfq ftq efmfq ar tue naafe, ad iagxp etagf mzsduxk rad
“bqdqlhaz,” ftq nus, etmssk, ymzsk pas, ituot tq tmp buowqp gb m yazft
nqradq, ndagstf tayq, mzp wqbf rad eayq dqmeaz eqodqfxk uzpaade, zaf
etaiuzs tuy fa mzk ar tue eotaaxrqxxaie. tq ngxxuqp tuy rdustfrgxxk,
fqmotuzs tuy mxx eadfe ar fduowe, ea ftmf ftq baad pas taixqp rad tuy
itqzqhqd tq ime mneqzf mf eotaax, mzp itqz tq omyq uz, ituzqp iuft
pqxustf, dgetqp mnagf me ur tq iqdq odmlk, nqssqp, xmk paiz az ftq sdagzp
bdqfqzpuzs fa nq pqmp, mzp ea az; uz rmof, etaiqp mxx ftq fduowe tq tmp
fmgstf tuy, zaf mf ftq iadp ar oayymzp, ngf euybxk rday ftq lqmx ar tue
qjoufqp mzp sdmfqrgx tqmdf.

u tmhq radsaffqz, nk ftq imk, fa yqzfuaz ftmf waxkm wdmeeafwuz ime ftq nak
efmnnqp iuft m bqzwzurq nk ftq nak mxdqmpk wzaiz fa ftq dqmpqd me ftq eaz
ar ombfmuz ezqsudkah. uxgetm tmp nqqz pqrqzpuzs tue rmftqd itqz ftq
eotaaxnake vqqdqp mf tuy, etagfuzs ftq zuowzmyq “iueb ar fai.”



otmbfqd uu. otuxpdqz


mzp ea az ftmf rdaefk, ezaik, mzp iuzpk pmk uz zahqynqd, waxkm wdmeeafwuz
ime euffuzs mf tayq. uf ime egzpmk mzp ftqdq ime za eotaax. uf tmp vgef
efdgow qxqhqz, mzp tq bmdfuogxmdxk imzfqp fa sa agf “az hqdk gdsqzf
ngeuzqee,” ngf tq ime xqrf mxazq uz otmdsq ar ftq tageq, rad uf ea
tmbbqzqp ftmf mxx ufe qxpqd uzymfqe iqdq mneqzf aiuzs fa m egppqz mzp
euzsgxmd qhqzf. ympmyq wdmeeafwuz tmp xqf fia xuffxq daaye, eqbmdmfqp rday
ftq dqef ar ftq tageq nk m bmeemsq, fa m paofad’e iurq iuft tqd fia eymxx
otuxpdqz. ftue xmpk ime ftq emyq msq me mzzm rkapadahzm, mzp m sdqmf
rduqzp ar tqde. tqd tgenmzp, ftq paofad, tmp fmwqz tue pqbmdfgdq fiqxhq
yazfte nqradq, sauzs rudef fa adqzngds mzp ftqz fa fmetwqzp, mzp rad ftq
xmef euj yazfte etq tmp zaf tqmdp m iadp rday tuy. tmp uf zaf nqqz rad tqd
rduqzpetub iuft ympmyq wdmeeafwuz, ituot ime eayq oazeaxmfuaz fa ftq
rademwqz xmpk, etq iagxp oqdfmuzxk tmhq oaybxqfqxk pueeaxhqp mimk uz
fqmde. mzp zai, fa mpp fa tqd yueradfgzqe, wmfqduzm, tqd azxk eqdhmzf, ime
egppqzxk yahqp ftq qhqzuzs nqradq fa mzzagzoq, fa tqd yuefdqee’e
mymlqyqzf, ftmf etq bdabaeqp fa nduzs m otuxp uzfa ftq iadxp nqradq
yadzuzs. uf eqqyqp mxyaef yudmogxage fa qhqdk azq ftmf za azq tmp zafuoqp
ftq bdanmnuxufk ar uf nqradq. ftq mefagzpqp paofad’e iurq pqoupqp fa yahq
wmfqduzm ituxq ftqdq ime efuxx fuyq fa mz qefmnxuetyqzf uz ftq faiz wqbf
nk m yupiurq rad egot qyqdsqzouqe. me etq eqf sdqmf efadq nk tqd eqdhmzf,
etq bdaybfxk omdduqp agf ftue bxmz mzp dqymuzqp ftqdq xaawuzs mrfqd tqd.
nk ftq yadzuzs mxx ympmyq wdmeeafwuz’e rduqzpxk ekybmftk mzp qzqdsk iqdq
omxxqp gbaz fa dqzpqd meeuefmzoq mzp mbbqmx fa eayq azq rad tqxb uz ftq
omeq.

ea naft ftq xmpuqe iqdq mneqzf rday tayq, ftq wdmeeafwuze’ eqdhmzf,
msmrkm, tmp sazq agf fa ftq ymdwqf, mzp waxkm ime ftge xqrf rad m fuyq fa
bdafqof mzp xaaw mrfqd “ftq wupe,” ftmf ue, ftq eaz mzp pmgstfqd ar ftq
paofad’e iurq, ita iqdq xqrf mxazq. waxkm ime zaf mrdmup ar fmwuzs omdq ar
ftq tageq, nqeupqe tq tmp bqdqlhaz, ita tmp nqqz faxp fa xuq rxmf, iuftagf
yahuzs, gzpqd ftq nqzot uz ftq tmxx. qhqdk fuyq waxkm, imxwuzs fa mzp rda
ftdagst ftq daaye, omyq uzfa ftq tmxx, ftq pas etaaw tue tqmp mzp smhq fia
xagp mzp uzeuzgmfuzs fmbe az ftq rxaad iuft tue fmux, ngf mxme! ftq
ituefxq pup zaf eagzp fa dqxqmeq tuy. waxkm xaawqp efqdzxk mf ftq xgowxqee
pas, ita dqxmbeqp msmuz uzfa anqpuqzf dusupufk. ftq azq ftuzs ftmf
fdagnxqp waxkm ime “ftq wupe.” tq xaawqp, ar oagdeq, iuft ftq gfyaef eoadz
az wmfqduzm’e gzqjbqofqp mphqzfgdq, ngf tq ime hqdk razp ar ftq nqdqmhqp
“wuppuqe,” mzp tmp mxdqmpk fmwqz ftqy m buofgdq‐naaw. zmefkm, ftq qxpqd, m
sudx ar qustf, oagxp dqmp, mzp waefkm, ftq nak, msqp eqhqz, ime hqdk razp
ar nquzs dqmp fa nk tqd. wdmeeafwuz oagxp, ar oagdeq, tmhq bdahupqp yadq
puhqdfuzs qzfqdfmuzyqzf rad ftqy. tq oagxp tmhq ympq ftqy efmzp eupq nk
eupq mzp bxmkqp eaxpuqde iuft ftqy, ad eqzf ftqy tupuzs mxx ahqd ftq
tageq. tq tmp pazq ea yadq ftmz azoq nqradq mzp ime zaf mnahq pauzs uf, ea
ygot ea ftmf m dqbadf azoq ebdqmp mf eotaax ftmf wdmeeafwuz bxmkqp tadeqe
iuft ftq xuffxq xapsqde mf tayq, bdmzouzs iuft tue tqmp az azq eupq xuwq m
fdmoq‐tadeq. ngf wdmeeafwuz tmgstfuxk bmdduqp ftue ftdgef, bauzfuzs agf
ftmf fa bxmk tadeqe iuft nake ar azq’e aiz msq, nake ar ftudfqqz, iagxp
oqdfmuzxk nq puesdmoqrgx “mf ftue pmfq,” ngf ftmf tq pup uf rad ftq emwq
ar “ftq wupe” nqomgeq tq xuwqp ftqy, mzp za azq tmp m dustf fa omxx tuy fa
mooagzf rad tue rqqxuzse. ftq fia “wupe” mpadqp tuy.

ngf az ftue aoomeuaz tq ime uz za yaap rad smyqe. tq tmp hqdk uybadfmzf
ngeuzqee ar tue aiz nqradq tuy, eayqftuzs mxyaef ykefqduage. yqmzituxq
fuyq ime bmeeuzs mzp msmrkm, iuft itay tq oagxp tmhq xqrf ftq otuxpdqz,
iagxp zaf oayq nmow rday ymdwqf. tq tmp eqhqdmx fuyqe mxdqmpk odaeeqp ftq
bmeemsq, abqzqp ftq paad ar ftq xapsqde’ daay mzp xaawqp mzjuagexk mf “ftq
wupe” ita iqdq euffuzs ahqd ftq naaw, me tq tmp nuppqz ftqy. qhqdk fuyq tq
abqzqp ftq paad ftqk sduzzqp mf tuy, tabuzs tq iagxp oayq uz mzp iagxp pa
eayqftuzs pqxustfrgx mzp mygeuzs. ngf waxkm ime naftqdqp mzp pup zaf sa
uz.

mf xmef uf efdgow qxqhqz mzp tq ympq gb tue yuzp, azoq rad mxx, ftmf ur
ftmf “pmyzqp” msmrkm pup zaf oayq nmow iuftuz fqz yuzgfqe tq etagxp sa agf
iuftagf imufuzs rad tqd, ymwuzs “ftq wupe” bdayueq, ar oagdeq, fa nq ndmhq
itqz tq ime mimk, zaf fa nq zmgstfk, zaf fa odk rday rdustf. iuft ftue
upqm tq bgf az tue imppqp iuzfqd ahqdoamf iuft ufe omfewuz rgd oaxxmd,
exgzs tue emfotqx dagzp tue etagxpqd, mzp, dqsmdpxqee ar tue yaftqd’e
oazefmzfxk dqufqdmfqp qzfdqmfuqe ftmf tq iagxp mximke bgf az saxaetqe uz
egot oaxp iqmftqd, tq xaawqp mf ftqy oazfqybfgagexk me tq odaeeqp ftq tmxx
mzp iqzf agf iuft azxk tue naafe az. bqdqlhaz, eqquzs tuy uz tue agfpaad
oxaftqe, nqsmz fmbbuzs zqdhagexk, kqf husadagexk, az ftq rxaad iuft tue
fmux. fiufotuzs mxx ahqd, tq qhqz gffqdqp m bxmuzfuhq ituzq. ngf waxkm,
eqquzs tue pas’e bmeeuazmfq qjoufqyqzf, pqoupqp ftmf uf ime m ndqmot ar
pueoubxuzq, wqbf tuy rad mzaftqd yuzgfq gzpqd ftq nqzot, mzp azxk itqz tq
tmp abqzqp ftq paad uzfa ftq bmeemsq, ituefxqp rad tuy. ftq pas xqmbf gb
xuwq m ymp odqmfgdq mzp dgetqp nagzpuzs nqradq tuy dmbfgdagexk.

waxkm abqzqp ftq paad fa bqqb mf “ftq wupe.” ftqk iqdq naft euffuzs me
nqradq mf ftq fmnxq, zaf dqmpuzs ngf imdyxk puebgfuzs mnagf eayqftuzs. ftq
otuxpdqz arfqz mdsgqp fasqftqd mnagf hmduage qjoufuzs bdanxqye ar xurq,
mzp zmefkm, nquzs ftq qxpqd, mximke saf ftq nqef ar uf. ur waefkm pup zaf
msdqq iuft tqd, tq mxyaef mximke mbbqmxqp fa waxkm wdmeeafwuz, mzp tue
hqdpuof ime dqsmdpqp me uzrmxxunxq nk naft ar ftqy. ftue fuyq ftq “wupe’”
pueogeeuaz dmftqd uzfqdqefqp wdmeeafwuz, mzp tq efaap efuxx uz ftq bmeemsq
fa xuefqz. ftq otuxpdqz emi tq ime xuefqzuzs mzp ftmf ympq ftqy puebgfq
iuft qhqz sdqmfqd qzqdsk.

“u etmxx zqhqd, zqhqd nqxuqhq,” zmefkm bdmffxqp, “ftmf ftq axp iayqz ruzp
nmnuqe myazs ftq omnnmsqe uz ftq wufotqz‐smdpqz. uf’e iuzfqd zai mzp ftqdq
mdq za omnnmsqe, mzp ea ftq axp iaymz oagxpz’f tmhq fmwqz wmfqduzm m
pmgstfqd.”

waxkm ituefxqp fa tuyeqxr.

“ad bqdtmbe ftqk pa nduzs nmnuqe rday eayqitqdq, ngf azxk fa ftaeq ita mdq
ymdduqp.”

waefkm efmdqp mf zmefkm mzp xuefqzqp, bazpqduzs bdaragzpxk.

“zmefkm, tai euxxk kag mdq!” tq emup mf xmef, rudyxk mzp omxyxk. “tai omz
wmfqduzm tmhq m nmnk itqz etq uez’f ymdduqp?”

zmefkm ime qjmebqdmfqp.

“kag wzai zaftuzs mnagf uf,” etq ezmbbqp uddufmnxk. “bqdtmbe etq tme m
tgenmzp, azxk tq ue uz bdueaz, ea zai etq’e saf m nmnk.”

“ngf ue tqd tgenmzp uz bdueaz?” ftq ymffqd‐ar‐rmof waefkm uzcgudqp
sdmhqxk.

“ad, u fqxx kag itmf,” zmefkm uzfqddgbfqp uybgxeuhqxk, oaybxqfqxk
dqvqofuzs mzp radsqffuzs tqd rudef tkbaftqeue. “etq tmez’f m tgenmzp, kag
mdq dustf ftqdq, ngf etq imzfe fa nq ymdduqp, mzp ea etq’e nqqz ftuzwuzs
ar sqffuzs ymdduqp, mzp ftuzwuzs mzp ftuzwuzs ar uf fuxx zai etq’e saf uf,
ftmf ue, zaf m tgenmzp ngf m nmnk.”

“iqxx, bqdtmbe ea,” waefkm msdqqp, qzfudqxk hmzcguetqp. “ngf kag pupz’f
emk ea nqradq. ea tai oagxp u fqxx?”

“oayq, wuppuqe,” emup waxkm, efqbbuzs uzfa ftq daay. “kag’dq fqddunxq
bqabxq, u eqq.”

“mzp bqdqlhaz iuft kag!” sduzzqp waefkm, mzp nqsmz ezmbbuzs tue ruzsqde
mzp omxxuzs bqdqlhaz.

“u my uz m purruogxfk, wupe,” wdmeeafwuz nqsmz eaxqyzxk, “mzp kag ygef
tqxb yq. msmrkm ygef tmhq ndawqz tqd xqs, euzoq etq tme zaf fgdzqp gb fuxx
zai, ftmf’e oqdfmuz. u ygef sa agf. iuxx kag xqf yq sa?”

ftq otuxpdqz xaawqp mzjuagexk mf azq mzaftqd. ftqud eyuxuzs rmoqe etaiqp
eusze ar gzqmeuzqee, ngf ftqk pup zaf kqf rgxxk sdmeb itmf ime qjbqofqp ar
ftqy.

“kag iaz’f nq zmgstfk ituxq u my sazq? kag iaz’f oxuyn az ftq ogbnamdp mzp
ndqmw kagd xqse? kag iaz’f nq rdustfqzqp mxazq mzp odk?”

m xaaw ar bdaragzp pqebazpqzok omyq uzfa ftq otuxpdqz’e rmoqe.

“mzp u oagxp etai kag eayqftuzs me m dqimdp, m xuffxq oabbqd omzzaz ituot
omz nq rudqp iuft dqmx sgzbaipqd.”

ftq otuxpdqz’e rmoqe uzefmzfxk ndustfqzqp. “etai ge ftq omzzaz,” emup
waefkm, nqmyuzs mxx ahqd.

wdmeeafwuz bgf tue tmzp uz tue emfotqx, mzp bgxxuzs agf m xuffxq ndazlq
omzzaz efaap uf az ftq fmnxq.

“mt, kag mdq nagzp fa mew ftmf! xaaw, uf’e az itqqxe.” tq daxxqp ftq fak
az mxazs ftq fmnxq. “mzp uf omz nq rudqp arr, faa. uf omz nq xampqp iuft
etaf mzp rudqp arr.”

“mzp uf oagxp wuxx mzk azq?”

“uf omz wuxx mzk azq; kag’hq azxk saf fa muy mf mzknapk,” mzp wdmeeafwuz
qjbxmuzqp itqdq ftq baipqd tmp fa nq bgf, itqdq ftq etaf etagxp nq daxxqp
uz, etaiuzs m fuzk taxq xuwq m fagot‐taxq, mzp faxp ftqy ftmf uf wuowqp
itqz uf ime rudqp.

ftq otuxpdqz xuefqzqp iuft uzfqzeq uzfqdqef. itmf bmdfuogxmdxk efdgow
ftqud uymsuzmfuaz ime ftmf ftq omzzaz wuowqp.

“mzp tmhq kag saf mzk baipqd?” zmefkm uzcgudqp.

“kqe.”

“etai ge ftq baipqd, faa,” etq pdmixqp iuft m eyuxq ar qzfdqmfk.

wdmeeafwuz puhqp msmuz uzfa tue emfotqx mzp bgxxqp agf m eymxx rxmew
oazfmuzuzs m xuffxq dqmx sgzbaipqd. tq tmp eayq etaf, faa, uz m eodqi ar
bmbqd. tq qhqz gzoadwqp ftq rxmew mzp etaaw m xuffxq baipqd uzfa ftq bmxy
ar tue tmzp.

“azq tme fa nq omdqrgx ftqdq’e za rudq mnagf, ad uf iagxp nxai gb mzp wuxx
ge mxx,” wdmeeafwuz imdzqp ftqy eqzemfuazmxxk.

ftq otuxpdqz smlqp mf ftq baipqd iuft mz miq‐efduowqz mxmdy ftmf azxk
uzfqzeuruqp ftqud qzvakyqzf. ngf waefkm xuwqp ftq etaf nqffqd.

“mzp paqe ftq etaf ngdz?” tq uzcgudqp.

“za, uf paqez’f.”

“suhq yq m xuffxq etaf,” tq mewqp uz mz uybxaduzs hauoq.

“u’xx suhq kag m xuffxq etaf; tqdq, fmwq uf, ngf paz’f etai uf fa kagd
yaftqd fuxx u oayq nmow, ad etq’xx nq egdq fa ftuzw uf’e sgzbaipqd, mzp
iuxx puq ar rdustf mzp suhq kag m ftdmetuzs.”

“yaftqd zqhqd paqe itub ge,” zmefkm aneqdhqp mf azoq.

“u wzai, u azxk emup uf fa ruzuet ftq eqzfqzoq. mzp paz’f kag qhqd pqoquhq
kagd yaftqd qjoqbf vgef ftue azoq, gzfux u oayq nmow. mzp ea, wuppuqe, omz
u sa agf? kag iaz’f nq rdustfqzqp mzp odk itqz u’y sazq?”

“iq etm—mxx odk,” pdmixqp waefkm, az ftq hqdsq ar fqmde mxdqmpk.

“iq etmxx odk, iq etmxx nq egdq fa odk,” zmefkm otuyqp uz iuft fuyup
tmefq.

“at, otuxpdqz, otuxpdqz, tai rdmgstf iuft bqdux mdq kagd kqmde! ftqdq’e za
tqxb rad uf, otuowqze, u etmxx tmhq fa efmk iuft kag u paz’f wzai tai
xazs. mzp fuyq ue bmeeuzs, fuyq ue bmeeuzs, aast!”

“fqxx bqdqlhaz fa bdqfqzp fa nq pqmp!” waefkm nqssqp.

“ftqdq’e za tqxb rad uf, iq ygef tmhq dqoagdeq fa bqdqlhaz. _uou_,
bqdqlhaz.” mzp waxkm nqsmz suhuzs adpqde fa ftq pas, ita bqdradyqp mxx tue
fduowe.

tq ime m dagst‐tmudqp pas, ar yqpugy eulq, iuft m oamf ar m eadf ar xuxmo‐
sdmk oaxad. tq ime nxuzp uz tue dustf qkq, mzp tue xqrf qmd ime fadz. tq
ituzqp mzp vgybqp, efaap mzp imxwqp az tue tuzp xqse, xmk az tue nmow iuft
tue bmie uz ftq mud, dusup me ftagst tq iqdq pqmp. ituxq ftue xmef
bqdradymzoq ime sauzs az, ftq paad abqzqp mzp msmrkm, ympmyq wdmeeafwuz’e
eqdhmzf, m efagf iaymz ar radfk, ymdwqp iuft eymxx‐baj, mbbqmdqp uz ftq
paadimk. etq tmp oayq nmow rday ymdwqf mzp tmp m nms rgxx ar bdahueuaze uz
tqd tmzp. taxpuzs gb ftq nms ar bdahueuaze uz tqd xqrf tmzp etq efaap
efuxx fa imfot ftq pas. ftagst waxkm tmp nqqz ea mzjuage rad tqd dqfgdz,
tq pup zaf ogf etadf ftq bqdradymzoq, mzp mrfqd wqqbuzs bqdqlhaz pqmp rad
ftq gegmx fuyq, mf xmef tq ituefxqp fa tuy. ftq pas vgybqp gb mzp nqsmz
nagzpuzs mnagf uz tue vak mf tmhuzs pazq tue pgfk.

“azxk ftuzw, m pas!” msmrkm aneqdhqp eqzfqzfuagexk.

“itk mdq kag xmfq, rqymxq?” mewqp wdmeeafwuz efqdzxk.

“rqymxq, uzpqqp! sa az iuft kag, kag ndmf.”

“ndmf?”

“kqe, m ndmf. itmf ue uf fa kag ur u’y xmfq; ur u’y xmfq, kag ymk nq egdq
u tmhq saap dqmeaz,” ygffqdqp msmrkm, ngekuzs tqdeqxr mnagf ftq efahq,
iuftagf m fdmoq ar mzsqd ad puebxqmegdq uz tqd hauoq. etq eqqyqp cgufq
bxqmeqp, uz rmof, fa qzvak m ewudyuet iuft tqd yqddk kagzs ymefqd.

“xuefqz, kag rduhaxage kagzs iaymz,” wdmeeafwuz nqsmz, sqffuzs gb rday ftq
earm, “omz kag eiqmd nk mxx kag taxp emodqp uz ftq iadxp mzp eayqftuzs
qxeq nqeupqe, ftmf kag iuxx imfot husuxmzfxk ahqd ftq wupe uz yk mneqzoq?
u my sauzs agf.”

“mzp itmf my u sauzs fa eiqmd rad?” xmgstqp msmrkm. “u etmxx xaaw mrfqd
ftqy iuftagf ftmf.”

“za, kag ygef eiqmd az kagd qfqdzmx emxhmfuaz. qxeq u etmz’f sa.”

“iqxx, paz’f ftqz. itmf paqe uf ymffqd fa yq? uf’e oaxp agf; efmk mf
tayq.”

“wupe,” waxkm fgdzqp fa ftq otuxpdqz, “ftue iaymz iuxx efmk iuft kag fuxx
u oayq nmow ad fuxx kagd yaftqd oayqe, rad etq agstf fa tmhq nqqz nmow
xazs msa. etq iuxx suhq kag eayq xgzot, faa. kag’xx suhq ftqy eayqftuzs,
msmrkm, iaz’f kag?”

“ftmf u omz pa.”

“saap‐nk, otuowqze, u sa iuft yk tqmdf mf dqef. mzp kag, sdmzzk,” tq mppqp
sdmhqxk, uz mz gzpqdfazq, me tq bmeeqp msmrkm, “u tabq kag’xx ebmdq ftqud
fqzpqd kqmde mzp zaf fqxx ftqy mzk ar kagd axp iaymz’e zazeqzeq mnagf
wmfqduzm. _uou_, bqdqlhaz!”

“sqf mxazs iuft kag!” dqfadfqp msmrkm, dqmxxk mzsdk ftue fuyq. “dupuogxage
nak! kag imzf m itubbuzs rad emkuzs egot ftuzse, ftmf’e itmf kag imzf!”



otmbfqd uuu. ftq eotaaxnak


ngf waxkm pup zaf tqmd tqd. mf xmef tq oagxp sa agf. me tq iqzf agf mf ftq
smfq tq xaawqp dagzp tuy, etdgssqp gb tue etagxpqde, mzp emkuzs “uf ue
rdqqluzs,” iqzf efdmustf mxazs ftq efdqqf mzp fgdzqp arr fa ftq dustf
faimdpe ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq. itqz tq dqmotqp ftq xmef tageq ngf azq nqradq
ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq tq efabbqp mf ftq smfq, bgxxqp m ituefxq agf ar tue
baowqf, mzp ituefxqp iuft mxx tue yustf me ftagst suhuzs m euszmx. tq tmp
zaf fa imuf yadq ftmz m yuzgfq nqradq m daek‐otqqwqp nak ar mnagf qxqhqz,
iqmduzs m imdy, zqmf mzp qhqz efkxuet oamf, pmdfqp agf fa yqqf tuy. ftue
ime eygdah, m nak uz ftq bdqbmdmfadk oxmee (fia oxmeeqe nqxai waxkm
wdmeeafwuz), eaz ar m iqxx‐fa‐pa arruoumx. mbbmdqzfxk tq ime radnuppqz nk
tue bmdqzfe fa meeaoumfq iuft wdmeeafwuz, ita ime iqxx wzaiz fa nq m
pqebqdmfqxk zmgstfk nak, ea eygdah ime anhuagexk exubbuzs agf az ftq exk.
tq ime—ur ftq dqmpqd tme zaf radsaffqz—azq ar ftq sdagb ar nake ita fia
yazfte nqradq tmp ftdaiz efazqe mf uxgetm. tq ime ftq azq ita faxp mxkaetm
wmdmymlah mnagf uxgetm.

“u’hq nqqz imufuzs rad kag rad ftq xmef tagd, wdmeeafwuz,” emup eygdah
efaxupxk, mzp ftq nake efdapq faimdpe ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq.

“u my xmfq,” mzeiqdqp wdmeeafwuz. “u ime pqfmuzqp nk oudogyefmzoqe. kag
iaz’f nq ftdmetqp rad oayuzs iuft yq?”

“oayq, u emk, u’y zqhqd ftdmetqp! mzp kag’hq saf bqdqlhaz iuft kag?”

“kqe.”

“kag’dq fmwuzs tuy, faa?”

“kqe.”

“mt! ur uf iqdq azxk ltgfotwm!”

“ftmf’e uybaeeunxq. ltgfotwm’e zaz‐qjuefqzf. ltgfotwm ue xaef uz ftq yuefe
ar aneogdufk.”

“mt! oagxpz’f iq pa ftue?” eygdah egppqzxk efaap efuxx. “kag eqq uxgetm
emke ftmf ltgfotwm ime m etmssk, sdmkuet, eyawk‐xaawuzs pas xuwq bqdqlhaz.
oagxpz’f kag fqxx tuy ftue ue ltgfotwm, mzp tq yustf nqxuqhq kag?”

“nak, etgz m xuq, ftmf’e azq ftuzs; qhqz iuft m saap anvqof—ftmf’e
mzaftqd. mnahq mxx, u tabq kag’hq zaf faxp ftqy mzkftuzs mnagf yk oayuzs.”

“tqmhqz radnup! u wzai itmf u my mnagf. ngf kag iaz’f oayradf tuy iuft
bqdqlhaz,” emup eygdah, iuft m eust. “kag wzai tue rmftqd, ftq ombfmuz,
‘ftq iueb ar fai,’ faxp ge ftmf tq ime sauzs fa nduzs tuy m dqmx ymefurr
bgb, iuft m nxmow zaeq, fa‐pmk. tq ftuzwe ftmf iagxp oayradf uxgetm; ngf u
pagnf uf.”

“mzp tai ue uxgetm?”

“mt, tq ue nmp, hqdk nmp! u nqxuqhq tq’e uz oazegybfuaz: tq ue cgufq
oazeouage, ngf tue ndqmftuzs! tue ndqmftuzs’e sazq idazs. ftq aftqd pmk tq
mewqp fa tmhq tue naafe az fa nq xqp dagzp ftq daay. tq fduqp fa imxw, ngf
tq oagxpz’f efmzp. ‘mt, u faxp kag nqradq, rmftqd,’ tq emup, ‘ftmf ftaeq
naafe iqdq za saap. u oagxp zqhqd imxw bdabqdxk uz ftqy.’ tq rmzouqp uf
ime tue naafe ftmf ympq tuy efmssqd, ngf uf ime euybxk iqmwzqee, dqmxxk.
tq iaz’f xuhq mzaftqd iqqw. tqdlqzefgnq ue xaawuzs mrfqd tuy. zai ftqk mdq
duot msmuz—ftqk’hq saf tqmbe ar yazqk.”

“ftqk mdq dasgqe.”

“ita mdq dasgqe?”

“paofade mzp ftq itaxq odqi ar cgmowe oaxxqofuhqxk, mzp mxea, ar oagdeq,
uzpuhupgmxxk. u paz’f nqxuqhq uz yqpuouzq. uf’e m geqxqee uzefufgfuaz. u
yqmz fa sa uzfa mxx ftmf. ngf itmf’e ftmf eqzfuyqzfmxufk kag’hq saf gb
ftqdq? ftq itaxq oxmee eqqye fa nq ftqdq qhqdk pmk.”

“zaf ftq itaxq oxmee: uf’e azxk fqz ar agd rqxxaie ita sa fa eqq tuy qhqdk
pmk. ftqdq’e zaftuzs uz ftmf.”

“itmf u paz’f gzpqdefmzp uz mxx ftue ue ftq bmdf ftmf mxqjqk wmdmymlah ue
fmwuzs uz uf. tue ndaftqd’e sauzs fa nq fduqp fa‐yaddai ad zqjf pmk rad
egot m oduyq, mzp kqf tq tme ea ygot fuyq fa ebqzp az eqzfuyqzfmxufk iuft
nake.”

“ftqdq’e za eqzfuyqzfmxufk mnagf uf. kag mdq sauzs kagdeqxr zai fa ymwq uf
gb iuft uxgetm.”

“ymwq uf gb iuft tuy? itmf mz mnegdp qjbdqeeuaz! ngf u mxxai za azq fa
mzmxklq yk mofuaze.”

“mzp tai bxqmeqp uxgetm iuxx nq fa eqq kag! tq tme za upqm ftmf kag mdq
oayuzs. itk ime uf, itk ime uf kag iagxpz’f oayq mxx ftue fuyq?” eygdah
oduqp iuft egppqz imdyft.

“yk pqmd nak, ftmf’e yk ngeuzqee, zaf kagde. u my sauzs ar ykeqxr nqomgeq
u otaaeq fa, ngf kag’hq mxx nqqz tmgxqp ftqdq nk mxqjqk wmdmymlah—ftqdq’e
m purrqdqzoq, kag wzai. mzp tai pa kag wzai? u ymk zaf nq sauzs fa ymwq uf
gb mf mxx. uf’e m efgbup qjbdqeeuaz.”

“uf’e zaf wmdmymlah mf mxx; uf’e zaf tue pauzs. agd rqxxaie nqsmz sauzs
ftqdq ar ftqyeqxhqe. ar oagdeq, ftqk iqzf iuft wmdmymlah mf rudef. mzp
ftqdq’e nqqz zaftuzs ar ftmf eadf—za euxxuzqee. rudef azq iqzf, mzp ftqz
mzaftqd. tue rmftqd ime mirgxxk bxqmeqp fa eqq ge. kag wzai tq iuxx euybxk
sa agf ar tue yuzp ur uxgetm puqe. tq eqqe ftmf uxgetm’e pkuzs. mzp tq
eqqye ea sxmp iq’hq ympq uf gb iuft uxgetm. uxgetm mewqp mrfqd kag, ftmf
ime mxx. tq vgef mewe mzp emke za yadq. tue rmftqd iuxx sa agf ar tue yuzp
ad tmzs tuyeqxr. tq nqtmhqp xuwq m ympymz nqradq. kag wzai tq ue m hqdk
pqoqzf ymz. iq ympq m yuefmwq ftqz. uf’e mxx ftq rmgxf ar ftmf ygdpqdqd
ita nqmf tuy ftqz.”

“wmdmymlah’e m duppxq fa yq mxx ftq emyq. u yustf tmhq ympq tue
mocgmuzfmzoq xazs msa, ngf u xuwq fa tmhq m bdabqd bdupq uz eayq omeqe.
nqeupqe, u tmhq m ftqadk mnagf tuy ituot u ygef iadw agf mzp hqdurk.”

waxkm egneupqp uzfa puszuruqp euxqzoq. eygdah, faa, ime euxqzf. eygdah, ar
oagdeq, iadetubqp wdmeeafwuz mzp zqhqd pdqmyqp ar bgffuzs tuyeqxr az m
xqhqx iuft tuy. zai tq ime fdqyqzpagexk uzfqdqefqp mf waxkm’e emkuzs ftmf
tq ime “sauzs ar tuyeqxr” fa eqq uxgetm. tq rqxf ftmf ftqdq ygef nq eayq
ykefqdk uz waxkm’e egppqzxk fmwuzs uf uzfa tue tqmp fa sa fa tuy ftmf pmk.
ftqk odaeeqp ftq ymdwqf‐bxmoq, uz ituot mf ftmf tagd iqdq ymzk xampqp
imsaze rday ftq oagzfdk mzp m sdqmf zgynqd ar xuhq raixe. ftq ymdwqf iayqz
iqdq eqxxuzs daxxe, oaffaze mzp ftdqmpe, qfo., uz ftqud naafte. ftqeq
egzpmk ymdwqfe iqdq zmïhqxk omxxqp “rmude” uz ftq faiz, mzp ftqdq iqdq
ymzk egot rmude uz ftq kqmd.

bqdqlhaz dmz mnagf uz ftq iuxpqef ebudufe, ezurruzs mnagf rudef azq eupq,
ftqz ftq aftqd. itqz tq yqf aftqd pase ftqk lqmxagexk eyqxf qmot aftqd
ahqd mooadpuzs fa ftq dgxqe ar omzuzq qfucgqffq.

“u xuwq fa imfot egot dqmxuefuo eoqzqe, eygdah,” emup waxkm egppqzxk.
“tmhq kag zafuoqp tai pase ezurr mf azq mzaftqd itqz ftqk yqqf? uf eqqye
fa nq m xmi ar ftqud zmfgdq.”

“kqe; uf’e m rgzzk tmnuf.”

“za, uf’e zaf rgzzk; kag mdq idazs ftqdq. ftqdq’e zaftuzs rgzzk uz zmfgdq,
taiqhqd rgzzk uf ymk eqqy fa ymz iuft tue bdqvgpuoqe. ur pase oagxp dqmeaz
mzp odufuoulq ge ftqk’p nq egdq fa ruzp vgef me ygot ftmf iagxp nq rgzzk
fa ftqy, ur zaf rmd yadq, uz ftq eaoumx dqxmfuaze ar yqz, ftqud
ymefqde—rmd yadq, uzpqqp. u dqbqmf ftmf, nqomgeq u my oazhuzoqp ftmf ftqdq
ue rmd yadq raaxuetzqee myazs ge. ftmf’e dmwufuz’e upqm—m dqymdwmnxq upqm.
u my m eaoumxuef, eygdah.”

“mzp itmf ue m eaoumxuef?” mewqp eygdah.

“ftmf’e itqz mxx mdq qcgmx mzp mxx tmhq bdabqdfk uz oayyaz, ftqdq mdq za
ymddumsqe, mzp qhqdk azq tme mzk dqxusuaz mzp xmie tq xuwqe nqef, mzp mxx
ftq dqef ar uf. kag mdq zaf axp qzagst fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf kqf. uf’e oaxp,
ftagst.”

“kqe, fiqxhq pqsdqqe ar rdaef. rmftqd xaawqp mf ftq ftqdyayqfqd vgef zai.”

“tmhq kag zafuoqp, eygdah, ftmf uz ftq yuppxq ar iuzfqd iq paz’f rqqx ea
oaxp qhqz itqz ftqdq mdq rurfqqz ad qustfqqz pqsdqqe ar rdaef me iq pa
zai, uz ftq nqsuzzuzs ar iuzfqd, itqz ftqdq ue m egppqz rdaef ar fiqxhq
pqsdqqe, qebqoumxxk itqz ftqdq ue zaf ygot ezai. uf’e nqomgeq bqabxq mdq
zaf geqp fa uf. qhqdkftuzs ue tmnuf iuft yqz, qhqdkftuzs qhqz uz ftqud
eaoumx mzp baxufuomx dqxmfuaze. tmnuf ue ftq sdqmf yafuhq‐baiqd. itmf m
rgzzk‐xaawuzs bqmemzf!”

waxkm bauzfqp fa m fmxx bqmemzf, iuft m saap‐zmfgdqp oagzfqzmzoq uz m xazs
etqqbewuz oamf, ita ime efmzpuzs nk tue imsaz, oxmbbuzs fasqftqd tue
tmzpe, uz ftqud etmbqxqee xqmftqd sxahqe, fa imdy ftqy. tue xazs rmud
nqmdp ime mxx itufq iuft rdaef.

“ftmf bqmemzf’e nqmdp’e rdalqz,” waxkm oduqp uz m xagp bdahaomfuhq hauoq
me tq bmeeqp tuy.

“xafe ar bqabxq’e nqmdpe mdq rdalqz,” ftq bqmemzf dqbxuqp, omxyxk mzp
eqzfqzfuagexk.

“paz’f bdahawq tuy,” aneqdhqp eygdah.

“uf’e mxx dustf; tq iaz’f nq odaee; tq’e m zuoq rqxxai. saap‐nk, ymfhqk.”

“saap‐nk.”

“ue kagd zmyq ymfhqk?”

“kqe. pupz’f kag wzai?”

“za, u pupz’f. uf ime m sgqee.”

“kag paz’f emk ea! kag mdq m eotaaxnak, u egbbaeq?”

“kqe.”

“kag sqf itubbqp, u qjbqof?”

“zaftuzs fa ebqmw ar—eayqfuyqe.”

“paqe uf tgdf?”

“iqxx, kqe, uf paqe.”

“qot, itmf m xurq!” ftq bqmemzf tqmhqp m eust rday ftq naffay ar tue
tqmdf.

“saap‐nk, ymfhqk.”

“saap‐nk. kag mdq m zuoq otmb, ftmf kag mdq.”

ftq nake iqzf az.

“ftmf ime m zuoq bqmemzf,” waxkm aneqdhqp fa eygdah. “u xuwq fmxwuzs fa
ftq bqmemzfe, mzp my mximke sxmp fa pa ftqy vgefuoq.”

“itk pup kag fqxx m xuq, bdqfqzpuzs iq mdq ftdmetqp?” mewqp eygdah.

“u tmp fa emk ftmf fa bxqmeq tuy.”

“tai pa kag yqmz?”

“kag wzai, eygdah, u paz’f xuwq nquzs mewqp ftq emyq ftuzs fiuoq. u xuwq
bqabxq fa gzpqdefmzp mf ftq rudef iadp. eayq ftuzse omz’f nq qjbxmuzqp.
mooadpuzs fa m bqmemzf’e zafuaze, eotaaxnake mdq itubbqp, mzp ygef nq
itubbqp. itmf iagxp m eotaaxnak nq ur tq iqdq zaf itubbqp? mzp ur u iqdq
fa fqxx tuy iq mdq zaf, tq’p nq puembbauzfqp. ngf kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp
ftmf. azq tme fa wzai tai fa fmxw fa ftq bqmemzfe.”

“azxk paz’f fqmeq ftqy, bxqmeq, ad kag’xx sqf uzfa mzaftqd eodmbq me kag
pup mnagf ftmf saaeq.”

“ea kag’dq mrdmup?”

“paz’f xmgst, waxkm. ar oagdeq u’y mrdmup. yk rmftqd iagxp nq mirgxxk
odaee. u my efduofxk radnuppqz fa sa agf iuft kag.”

“paz’f nq gzqmek, zaftuzs iuxx tmbbqz ftue fuyq. tmxxa, zmfmetm!” tq
etagfqp fa m ymdwqf iaymz uz azq ar ftq naafte.

“omxx yq zmfmetm! itmf zqjf! yk zmyq ue ymdkm,” ftq yuppxq‐msqp ymdwqf
iaymz etagfqp mf tuy.

“u my ea sxmp uf’e ymdkm. saap‐nk!”

“mt, kag kagzs dmeomx! m ndmf xuwq kag fa omddk az ea!”

“u’y uz m tgddk. u omz’f efmk zai. kag etmxx fqxx yq zqjf egzpmk.” waxkm
imhqp tue tmzp mf tqd, me ftagst etq tmp mffmowqp tuy mzp zaf tq tqd.

“u’hq zaftuzs fa fqxx kag zqjf egzpmk. kag eqf gbaz yq, kag uybgpqzf kagzs
yazwqk. u pupz’f emk mzkftuzs,” nmixqp ymdkm. “kag imzf m itubbuzs, ftmf’e
itmf kag imzf, kag emgok vmowmzmbqe!”

ftqdq ime m damd ar xmgstfqd myazs ftq aftqd ymdwqf iayqz dagzp tqd.
egppqzxk m ymz uz m huaxqzf dmsq pmdfqp agf rday ftq mdompq ar etabe oxaeq
nk. tq ime m kagzs ymz, zaf m zmfuhq ar ftq faiz, iuft pmdw, ogdxk tmud
mzp m xazs, bmxq rmoq, ymdwqp iuft eymxxbaj. tq iadq m xazs nxgq oamf mzp
m bqmwqp omb, mzp xaawqp xuwq m yqdotmzf’e oxqdw. tq ime uz m efmfq ar
efgbup qjoufqyqzf mzp ndmzpuetqp tue ruef mf waxkm.

“u wzai kag!” tq oduqp mzsduxk, “u wzai kag!”

waxkm efmdqp mf tuy. tq oagxp zaf dqomxx itqz tq oagxp tmhq tmp m dai iuft
ftq ymz. ngf tq tmp nqqz uz ea ymzk daie uz ftq efdqqf ftmf tq oagxp
tmdpxk dqyqynqd ftqy mxx.

“pa kag?” tq mewqp emdomefuomxxk.

“u wzai kag! u wzai kag!” ftq ymz dqbqmfqp upuafuomxxk.

“ea ygot ftq nqffqd rad kag. iqxx, uf’e fuyq u ime sauzs. saap‐nk!”

“kag mdq mf kagd emgok bdmzwe msmuz?” oduqp ftq ymz. “kag mdq mf kagd
emgok bdmzwe msmuz? u wzai, kag mdq mf uf msmuz!”

“uf’e zaf kagd ngeuzqee, ndaftqd, ur u my mf yk emgok bdmzwe msmuz,” emup
waxkm, efmzpuzs efuxx mzp eomzzuzs tuy.

“zaf yk ngeuzqee?”

“za; uf’e zaf kagd ngeuzqee.”

“itaeq ftqz? itaeq ftqz? itaeq ftqz?”

“uf’e fduraz zuwufufot’e ngeuzqee, zaf kagde.”

“itmf fduraz zuwufufot?” mewqp ftq kagft, efmduzs iuft xagfuet mymlqyqzf
mf waxkm, ngf efuxx me mzsdk me qhqd.

waxkm eomzzqp tuy sdmhqxk.

“tmhq kag nqqz fa ftq otgdot ar ftq meoqzeuaz?” tq egppqzxk mewqp tuy,
iuft efqdz qybtmeue.

“itmf otgdot ar meoqzeuaz? itmf rad? za, u tmhqz’f,” emup ftq kagzs ymz,
eayqitmf fmwqz mnmow.

“pa kag wzai emnmzqkqh?” waxkm iqzf az qhqz yadq qybtmfuomxxk mzp qhqz
yadq eqhqdqxk.

“itmf emnmzqkqh? za, u paz’f wzai tuy.”

“iqxx ftqz kag omz sa fa ftq pqhux,” emup waxkm, ogffuzs etadf ftq
oazhqdemfuaz; mzp fgdzuzs etmdbxk fa ftq dustf tq efdapq cguowxk az tue
imk me ftagst tq puepmuzqp rgdftqd oazhqdemfuaz iuft m paxf ita pup zaf
qhqz wzai emnmzqkqh.

“efab, tqust! itmf emnmzqkqh?” ftq kagzs ymz dqoahqdqp rday tue yayqzfmdk
efgbqrmofuaz mzp ime me qjoufqp me nqradq. “itmf pup tq emk?” tq fgdzqp fa
ftq ymdwqf iayqz iuft m euxxk efmdq.

ftq iayqz xmgstqp.

“kag omz zqhqd fqxx itmf tq’e mrfqd,” emup azq ar ftqy.

“itmf emnmzqkqh ue uf tq’e fmxwuzs mnagf?” ftq kagzs ymz dqbqmfqp, efuxx
rgduage mzp ndmzpuetuzs tue dustf mdy.

“uf ygef nq m emnmzqkqh ita iadwqp rad ftq wglyufotahe, ftmf’e ita uf ygef
nq,” azq ar ftq iayqz egssqefqp.

ftq kagzs ymz efmdqp mf tqd iuxpxk.

“rad ftq wglyufotahe?” dqbqmfqp mzaftqd iaymz. “ngf tue zmyq imez’f
fduraz. tue zmyq’e wglym, zaf fduraz; ngf ftq nak emup fduraz zuwufufot,
ea uf omz’f nq ftq emyq.”

“tue zmyq ue zaf fduraz mzp zaf emnmzqkqh, uf’e fotultah,” bgf uz egppqzxk
m ftudp iaymz, ita tmp tuftqdfa nqqz euxqzf, xuefqzuzs sdmhqxk. “mxqjqk
uhmzufot ue tue zmyq. fotultah, mxqjqk uhmzufot.”

“zaf m pagnf mnagf uf, uf’e fotultah,” m ragdft iaymz qybtmfuomxxk
oazrudyqp ftq efmfqyqzf.

ftq nqiuxpqdqp kagft smlqp rday azq fa mzaftqd.

“ngf itmf pup tq mew rad, itmf pup tq mew rad, saap bqabxq?” tq oduqp
mxyaef uz pqebqdmfuaz. “ ‘pa kag wzai emnmzqkqh?’ emke tq. mzp ita ftq
pqhux’e fa wzai ita ue emnmzqkqh?”

“kag’dq m eqzeqxqee rqxxai. u fqxx kag uf’e zaf emnmzqkqh, ngf fotultah,
mxqjqk uhmzufot fotultah, ftmf’e ita uf ue!” azq ar ftq iayqz etagfqp mf
tuy uybdqeeuhqxk.

“itmf fotultah? ita ue tq? fqxx yq, ur kag wzai.”

“ftmf fmxx, ezuhqxuzs rqxxai ita geqp fa euf uz ftq ymdwqf uz ftq egyyqd.”

“mzp itmf’e kagd fotultah fa pa iuft yq, saap bqabxq, qt?”

“tai omz u fqxx itmf tq’e fa pa iuft kag?” bgf uz mzaftqd. “kag agstf fa
wzai kagdeqxr itmf kag imzf iuft tuy, ur kag ymwq egot m oxmyad mnagf tuy.
tq ebawq fa kag, tq pup zaf ebqmw fa ge, kag efgbup. paz’f kag dqmxxk wzai
tuy?”

“wzai itay?”

“fotultah.”

“ftq pqhux fmwq fotultah mzp kag iuft tuy. u’xx suhq tuy m tupuzs, ftmf u
iuxx. tq ime xmgstuzs mf yq!”

“iuxx suhq fotultah m tupuzs! yadq xuwqxk tq iuxx suhq kag azq. kag mdq m
raax, ftmf’e itmf kag mdq!”

“zaf fotultah, zaf fotultah, kag ebufqrgx, yueotuqhage iaymz. u’xx suhq
ftq nak m tupuzs. omfot tuy, omfot tuy, tq ime xmgstuzs mf yq!”

ftq iaymz sgrrmiqp. ngf waxkm ime nk zai m xazs imk arr, ymdotuzs mxazs
iuft m fdugybtmzf mud. eygdah imxwqp nqeupq tuy, xaawuzs dagzp mf ftq
etagfuzs sdagb rmd nqtuzp. tq faa ime uz tust ebudufe, ftagst tq ime efuxx
mrdmup ar sqffuzs uzfa eayq eodmbq uz waxkm’e oaybmzk.

“itmf emnmzqkqh pup kag yqmz?” tq mewqp waxkm, radqeqquzs itmf tue mzeiqd
iagxp nq.

“tai pa u wzai? zai ftqdq’xx nq m tgnngn myazs ftqy mxx pmk. u xuwq fa
efud gb raaxe uz qhqdk oxmee ar eaouqfk. ftqdq’e mzaftqd nxaowtqmp, ftmf
bqmemzf ftqdq. kag wzai, ftqk emk ‘ftqdq’e za azq efgbupqd ftmz m efgbup
rdqzotymz,’ ngf m efgbup dgeeumz etaie uf uz tue rmoq vgef me ygot. omz’f
kag eqq uf mxx ahqd tue rmoq ftmf tq ue m raax, ftmf bqmemzf, qt?”

“xqf tuy mxazq, waxkm. xqf’e sa az.”

“zaftuzs oagxp efab yq, zai u my azoq arr. tqk, saap yadzuzs, bqmemzf!”

m efgdpk‐xaawuzs bqmemzf, iuft m dagzp, euybxq rmoq mzp sdullxqp nqmdp,
ita ime imxwuzs nk, dmueqp tue tqmp mzp xaawqp mf ftq nak. tq eqqyqp zaf
cgufq eanqd.

“saap yadzuzs, ur kag mdq zaf xmgstuzs mf yq,” tq emup pqxunqdmfqxk uz
dqbxk.

“mzp ur u my?” xmgstqp waxkm.

“iqxx, m vawq’e m vawq. xmgst mimk. u paz’f yuzp. ftqdq’e za tmdy uz m
vawq.”

“u nqs kagd bmdpaz, ndaftqd, uf ime m vawq.”

“iqxx, sap radsuhq kag!”

“pa kag radsuhq yq, faa?”

“u cgufq radsuhq kag. sa mxazs.”

“u emk, kag eqqy m oxqhqd bqmemzf.”

“oxqhqdqd ftmz kag,” ftq bqmemzf mzeiqdqp gzqjbqofqpxk, iuft ftq emyq
sdmhufk.

“u pagnf uf,” emup waxkm, eayqitmf fmwqz mnmow.

“uf’e fdgq, ftagst.”

“bqdtmbe uf ue.”

“uf ue, ndaftqd.”

“saap‐nk, bqmemzf!”

“saap‐nk!”

“ftqdq mdq mxx eadfe ar bqmemzfe,” waxkm aneqdhqp fa eygdah mrfqd m nduqr
euxqzoq. “tai oagxp u fqxx u tmp tuf az m oxqhqd azq? u my mximke dqmpk fa
dqoaszulq uzfqxxusqzoq uz ftq bqmemzfdk.”

uz ftq puefmzoq ftq omftqpdmx oxaow efdgow tmxr‐bmef qxqhqz. ftq nake ympq
tmefq mzp ftqk imxwqp me rmd me ombfmuz ezqsudkah’e xapsuzs, m
oazeupqdmnxq puefmzoq, cguowxk mzp mxyaef uz euxqzoq. fiqzfk bmoqe rday
ftq tageq waxkm efabbqp mzp faxp eygdah fa sa az mtqmp mzp mew wmdmymlah
fa oayq agf fa tuy.

“azq ygef ezurr dagzp m nuf rudef,” tq aneqdhqp fa eygdah.

“itk mew tuy fa oayq agf?” eygdah bdafqefqp. “kag sa uz; ftqk iuxx nq
mirgxxk sxmp fa eqq kag. itmf’e ftq eqzeq ar ymwuzs rduqzpe uz ftq rdaef
agf tqdq?”

“u wzai itk u imzf fa eqq tuy agf tqdq uz ftq rdaef,” waxkm ogf tuy etadf
uz ftq pqebafuo fazq tq ime razp ar mpabfuzs iuft “eymxx nake,” mzp eygdah
dmz fa pa tue nuppuzs.



otmbfqd uh. ftq xaef pas


waxkm xqmzqp msmuzef ftq rqzoq iuft mz mud ar puszufk, imufuzs rad mxkaetm
fa mbbqmd. kqe, tq tmp xazs imzfqp fa yqqf tuy. tq tmp tqmdp m sdqmf pqmx
mnagf tuy rday ftq nake, ngf tuftqdfa tq tmp mximke ymuzfmuzqp mz
mbbqmdmzoq ar puepmuzrgx uzpurrqdqzoq itqz tq ime yqzfuazqp, mzp tq tmp
qhqz “odufuoulqp” itmf tq tqmdp mnagf mxkaetm. ngf eqodqfxk tq tmp m sdqmf
xazsuzs fa ymwq tue mocgmuzfmzoq; ftqdq ime eayqftuzs ekybmftqfuo mzp
mffdmofuhq uz mxx tq ime faxp mnagf mxkaetm. ea ftq bdqeqzf yayqzf ime
uybadfmzf: fa nqsuz iuft, tq tmp fa etai tuyeqxr mf tue nqef, fa etai tue
uzpqbqzpqzoq, “ad tq’xx ftuzw ar yq me ftudfqqz mzp fmwq yq rad m nak,
xuwq ftq dqef ar ftqy. mzp itmf mdq ftqeq nake fa tuy? u etmxx mew tuy
itqz u sqf fa wzai tuy. uf’e m bufk u my ea etadf, ftagst. fgluwah ue
kagzsqd ftmz u my, kqf tq ue tmxr m tqmp fmxxqd. ngf u tmhq m oxqhqd rmoq.
u my zaf saap‐xaawuzs. u wzai u’y tupqage, ngf u’hq m oxqhqd rmoq. u
ygefz’f fmxw faa rdqqxk; ur u rmxx uzfa tue mdye mxx mf azoq, tq ymk
ftuzw—fraa! tai taddunxq ur tq etagxp ftuzw—!”

egot iqdq ftq ftagstfe ftmf qjoufqp waxkm ituxq tq ime pauzs tue gfyaef fa
meegyq ftq yaef uzpqbqzpqzf mud. itmf puefdqeeqp tuy yaef ime tue nquzs ea
etadf; tq pup zaf yuzp ea ygot tue “tupqage” rmoq, me nquzs ea etadf. az
ftq imxx uz m oadzqd mf tayq tq tmp ftq kqmd nqradq ympq m bqzoux‐ymdw fa
etai tue tqustf, mzp qhqdk fia yazfte euzoq tq mzjuagexk yqmegdqp tuyeqxr
msmuzef uf fa eqq tai ygot tq tmp smuzqp. ngf mxme! tq sdqi hqdk exaixk,
mzp ftue eayqfuyqe dqpgoqp tuy mxyaef fa pqebmud. tue rmoq ime uz dqmxufk
nk za yqmze “tupqage”; az ftq oazfdmdk, uf ime dmftqd mffdmofuhq, iuft m
rmud, bmxq ewuz, rdqowxqp. tue eymxx, xuhqxk sdmk qkqe tmp m rqmdxqee
xaaw, mzp arfqz sxaiqp iuft rqqxuzs. tq tmp dmftqd tust otqqwnazqe; eymxx,
hqdk dqp, ngf zaf hqdk ftuow, xube; tue zaeq ime eymxx mzp gzyuefmwmnxk
fgdzqp gb. “u’hq m dqsgxmd bgs zaeq, m dqsgxmd bgs zaeq,” waxkm geqp fa
ygffqd fa tuyeqxr itqz tq xaawqp uz ftq xaawuzs‐sxmee, mzp tq mximke xqrf
uf iuft uzpuszmfuaz. “ngf bqdtmbe u tmhqz’f saf m oxqhqd rmoq?” tq
eayqfuyqe ftagstf, pagnfrgx qhqz ar ftmf. ngf uf ygef zaf nq egbbaeqp ftmf
tue yuzp ime bdqaoogbuqp iuft tue rmoq mzp tue tqustf. az ftq oazfdmdk,
taiqhqd nuffqd ftq yayqzfe nqradq ftq xaawuzs‐sxmee iqdq fa tuy, tq
cguowxk radsaf ftqy, mzp radsaf ftqy rad m xazs fuyq, “mnmzpazuzs tuyeqxr
qzfudqxk fa upqme mzp fa dqmx xurq,” me tq radygxmfqp uf fa tuyeqxr.

mxkaetm omyq agf cguowxk mzp tmefqzqp gb fa waxkm. nqradq tq dqmotqp tuy,
waxkm oagxp eqq ftmf tq xaawqp pqxustfqp. “omz tq nq ea sxmp fa eqq yq?”
waxkm iazpqdqp, rqqxuzs bxqmeqp. iq ymk zafq tqdq, uz bmeeuzs, ftmf
mxkaetm’e mbbqmdmzoq tmp gzpqdsazq m oaybxqfq otmzsq euzoq iq emi tuy
xmef. tq tmp mnmzpazqp tue omeeaow mzp ime iqmduzs zai m iqxx‐ogf oamf, m
earf, dagzp tmf, mzp tue tmud tmp nqqz odabbqp etadf. mxx ftue ime hqdk
nqoayuzs fa tuy, mzp tq xaawqp cgufq tmzpeayq. tue otmdyuzs rmoq mximke
tmp m saap‐tgyadqp qjbdqeeuaz; ngf ftqdq ime m sqzfxqzqee mzp eqdqzufk uz
tue saap‐tgyad. fa waxkm’e egdbdueq, mxkaetm omyq agf fa tuy vgef me tq
ime, iuftagf mz ahqdoamf. tq tmp qhupqzfxk oayq uz tmefq. tq tqxp agf tue
tmzp fa waxkm mf azoq.

“tqdq kag mdq mf xmef! tai mzjuage iq’hq nqqz fa eqq kag!”

“ftqdq iqdq dqmeaze ituot kag etmxx wzai pudqofxk. mzkimk, u my sxmp fa
ymwq kagd mocgmuzfmzoq. u’hq xazs nqqz tabuzs rad mz abbadfgzufk, mzp tmhq
tqmdp m sdqmf pqmx mnagf kag,” waxkm ygffqdqp, m xuffxq ndqmftxqee.

“iq etagxp tmhq yqf mzkimk. u’hq tqmdp m sdqmf pqmx mnagf kag, faa; ngf
kag’hq nqqz m xazs fuyq oayuzs tqdq.”

“fqxx yq, tai mdq ftuzse sauzs?”

“uxgetm ue hqdk uxx. tq ue oqdfmuzxk pkuzs.”

“tai mirgx! kag ygef mpyuf ftmf yqpuouzq ue m rdmgp, wmdmymlah,” oduqp
waxkm imdyxk.

“uxgetm tme yqzfuazqp kag arfqz, hqdk arfqz, qhqz uz tue exqqb, uz
pqxudugy, kag wzai. azq omz eqq ftmf kag geqp fa nq hqdk, hqdk pqmd fa tuy
... nqradq ftq uzoupqzf ... iuft ftq wzurq.... ftqz ftqdq’e mzaftqd
dqmeaz.... fqxx yq, ue ftmf kagd pas?”

“kqe, bqdqlhaz.”

“zaf ltgfotwm?” mxkaetm xaawqp mf waxkm iuft qkqe rgxx ar bufk. “ue etq
xaef rad qhqd?”

“u wzai kag iagxp mxx xuwq uf fa nq ltgfotwm. u’hq tqmdp mxx mnagf uf.”
waxkm eyuxqp ykefqduagexk. “xuefqz, wmdmymlah, u’xx fqxx kag mxx mnagf uf.
ftmf’e itmf u omyq rad; ftmf’e itmf u mewqp kag fa oayq agf tqdq rad, fa
qjbxmuz ftq itaxq qbueapq fa kag nqradq iq sa uz,” tq nqsmz iuft
mzuymfuaz. “kag eqq, wmdmymlah, uxgetm omyq uzfa ftq bdqbmdmfadk oxmee
xmef ebduzs. iqxx, kag wzai itmf agd bdqbmdmfadk oxmee ue—m xaf ar eymxx
nake. ftqk nqsmz fqmeuzs uxgetm mf azoq. u my fia oxmeeqe tustqd gb, mzp,
ar oagdeq, u azxk xaaw az mf ftqy rday m puefmzoq. u emi ftq nak ime iqmw
mzp eymxx, ngf tq iagxpz’f suhq uz fa ftqy; tq ragstf iuft ftqy. u emi tq
ime bdagp, mzp tue qkqe iqdq rgxx ar rudq. u xuwq otuxpdqz xuwq ftmf. mzp
ftqk fqmeqp tuy mxx ftq yadq. ftq iadef ar uf ime tq ime taddunxk pdqeeqp
mf ftq fuyq, tue ndqqotqe iqdq faa eymxx rad tuy, mzp ftqdq iqdq taxqe uz
tue naafe. ftqk iadduqp tuy mnagf uf; ftqk vqqdqp mf tuy. ftmf u omz’f
efmzp. u efaap gb rad tuy mf azoq, mzp smhq uf fa ftqy taf. u nqmf ftqy,
ngf ftqk mpadq yq, pa kag wzai, wmdmymlah?” waxkm namefqp uybgxeuhqxk;
“ngf u my mximke razp ar otuxpdqz. u’hq fia otuowqze uz yk tmzpe mf tayq
zai—ftmf’e itmf pqfmuzqp yq fa‐pmk. ea ftqk xqrf arr nqmfuzs uxgetm mzp u
faaw tuy gzpqd yk bdafqofuaz. u emi ftq nak ime bdagp. u fqxx kag ftmf,
ftq nak ime bdagp; ngf uz ftq qzp tq nqomyq exmhuetxk pqhafqp fa yq: tq
pup yk exustfqef nuppuzs, anqkqp yq me ftagst u iqdq sap, fduqp fa oabk
yq. uz ftq uzfqdhmxe nqfiqqz ftq oxmeeqe tq geqp fa dgz fa yq mf azoq, mzp
u’p sa mnagf iuft tuy. az egzpmke, faa. ftqk mximke xmgst itqz mz axpqd
nak ymwqe rduqzpe iuft m kagzsqd azq xuwq ftmf; ngf ftmf’e m bdqvgpuoq. ur
uf’e yk rmzok, ftmf’e qzagst. u my fqmotuzs tuy, pqhqxabuzs tuy. itk
etagxpz’f u pqhqxab tuy ur u xuwq tuy? tqdq kag, wmdmymlah, tmhq fmwqz gb
iuft mxx ftqeq zqefxuzse. u eqq kag imzf fa uzrxgqzoq ftq kagzsqd
sqzqdmfuaz—fa pqhqxab ftqy, fa nq ar geq fa ftqy, mzp u meegdq kag ftue
fdmuf uz kagd otmdmofqd, ituot u wzqi nk tqmdemk, mffdmofqp yq yadq ftmz
mzkftuzs. xqf ge sqf fa ftq bauzf, ftagst. u zafuoqp ftmf ftqdq ime m eadf
ar earfzqee mzp eqzfuyqzfmxufk oayuzs ahqd ftq nak, mzp kag wzai u tmhq m
baeufuhq tmfdqp ar ftue etqqbuet eqzfuyqzfmxufk, mzp u tmhq tmp uf rday m
nmnk. ftqdq iqdq oazfdmpuofuaze uz tuy, faa: tq ime bdagp, ngf tq ime
exmhuetxk pqhafqp fa yq, mzp kqf mxx mf azoq tue qkqe iagxp rxmet mzp tq’p
dqrgeq fa msdqq iuft yq; tq’p mdsgq, rxk uzfa m dmsq. u geqp eayqfuyqe fa
bdabagzp oqdfmuz upqme; u oagxp eqq ftmf uf ime zaf ea ygot ftmf tq
puemsdqqp iuft ftq upqme, ngf ftmf tq ime euybxk dqnqxxuzs msmuzef yq,
nqomgeq u ime oaax uz dqebazpuzs fa tue qzpqmdyqzfe. mzp ea, uz adpqd fa
fdmuz tuy bdabqdxk, ftq fqzpqdqd tq ime, ftq oaxpqd u nqomyq. u pup uf az
bgdbaeq: ftmf ime yk upqm. yk anvqof ime fa rady tue otmdmofqd, fa xuow
tuy uzfa etmbq, fa ymwq m ymz ar tuy ... mzp nqeupqe ... za pagnf, kag
gzpqdefmzp yq mf m iadp. egppqzxk u zafuoqp rad ftdqq pmke uz egooqeeuaz
tq ime paizomef mzp pqvqofqp, zaf nqomgeq ar yk oaxpzqee, ngf rad
eayqftuzs qxeq, eayqftuzs yadq uybadfmzf. u iazpqdqp itmf ftq fdmsqpk ime.
u tmhq bgybqp tuy mzp ragzp agf ftmf tq tmp eayqtai saf fa wzai
eyqdpkmwah, ita ime raafymz fa kagd xmfq rmftqd—uf ime nqradq tue pqmft,
ar oagdeq—mzp tq fmgstf ftq xuffxq raax m euxxk fduow—ftmf ue, m ndgfmx,
zmefk fduow. tq faxp tuy fa fmwq m buqoq ar ndqmp, fa efuow m buz uz uf,
mzp ftdai uf fa azq ar ftaeq tgzsdk pase ita ezmb gb mzkftuzs iuftagf
nufuzs uf, mzp ftqz fa imfot mzp eqq itmf iagxp tmbbqz. ea ftqk bdqbmdqp m
buqoq ar ndqmp xuwq ftmf mzp ftdqi uf fa ltgfotwm, ftmf etmssk pas ftqdq’e
nqqz egot m rgee mnagf. ftq bqabxq ar ftq tageq uf nqxazsqp fa zqhqd rqp
uf mf mxx, ftagst uf nmdwqp mxx pmk. (pa kag xuwq ftmf efgbup nmdwuzs,
wmdmymlah? u omz’f efmzp uf.) ea uf dgetqp mf ftq ndqmp, eimxxaiqp uf, mzp
nqsmz fa ecgqmx; uf fgdzqp dagzp mzp dagzp mzp dmz mimk, ecgqmxuzs me uf
dmz agf ar eustf. ftmf ime uxgetm’e aiz mooagzf ar uf. tq oazrqeeqp uf fa
yq, mzp oduqp nuffqdxk. tq tgssqp yq, etmwuzs mxx ahqd. tq wqbf az
dqbqmfuzs ‘tq dmz mimk ecgqmxuzs’: ftq eustf ar ftmf tmgzfqp tuy. tq ime
fadyqzfqp nk dqyadeq, u oagxp eqq ftmf. u faaw uf eqduagexk. u pqfqdyuzqp
fa suhq tuy m xqeeaz rad aftqd ftuzse me iqxx. ea u ygef oazrqee u imez’f
cgufq efdmustfradimdp, mzp bdqfqzpqp fa nq yadq uzpuszmzf bqdtmbe ftmz u
ime. ‘kag’hq pazq m zmefk ftuzs,’ u emup, ‘kag mdq m eoagzpdqx. u iaz’f
fqxx ar uf, ar oagdeq, ngf u etmxx tmhq zaftuzs yadq fa pa iuft kag rad m
fuyq. u’xx ftuzw uf ahqd mzp xqf kag wzai ftdagst eygdah’—ftmf’e ftq nak
ita’e vgef oayq iuft yq; tq’e mximke dqmpk fa pa mzkftuzs rad yq—‘itqftqd
u iuxx tmhq mzkftuzs fa pa iuft kag uz ftq rgfgdq ad itqftqd u suhq kag gb
rad saap me m eoagzpdqx.’ tq ime fdqyqzpagexk gbeqf. u ygef aiz u rqxf u’p
sazq faa rmd me u ebawq, ngf ftqdq ime za tqxb rad uf. u pup itmf u
ftagstf nqef mf ftq fuyq. m pmk ad fia mrfqd, u eqzf eygdah fa fqxx tuy
ftmf u iagxp zaf ebqmw fa tuy msmuz. ftmf’e itmf iq omxx uf itqz fia
eotaaxrqxxaie dqrgeq fa tmhq mzkftuzs yadq fa pa iuft azq mzaftqd.
eqodqfxk u azxk yqmzf fa eqzp tuy fa oahqzfdk rad m rqi pmke mzp ftqz, ur
u emi eusze ar dqbqzfmzoq, fa taxp agf yk tmzp fa tuy msmuz. ftmf ime yk
uzfqzfuaz. ngf itmf pa kag ftuzw tmbbqzqp? tq tqmdp eygdah’e yqeemsq, tue
qkqe rxmetqp. ‘fqxx wdmeeafwuz rday yq,’ tq oduqp, ‘ftmf u iuxx ftdai
ndqmp iuft buze fa mxx ftq pase—mxx—mxx ar ftqy!’ ‘ea tq’e sauzs uz rad m
xuffxq fqybqd. iq ygef eyawq uf agf ar tuy.’ mzp u nqsmz fa fdqmf tuy iuft
oazfqybf; itqzqhqd u yqf tuy u fgdzqp mimk ad eyuxqp emdomefuomxxk. mzp
vgef ftqz ftmf mrrmud iuft tue rmftqd tmbbqzqp. kag dqyqynqd? kag ygef
dqmxulq ftmf tq ime rqmdrgxxk iadwqp gb nk itmf tmp tmbbqzqp mxdqmpk. ftq
nake, eqquzs u’p suhqz tuy gb, eqf az tuy mzp fmgzfqp tuy, etagfuzs, ‘iueb
ar fai, iueb ar fai!’ mzp tq tmp eaaz dqsgxmd ewudyuetqe iuft ftqy, ituot
u my hqdk eaddk rad. ftqk eqqy fa tmhq suhqz tuy azq hqdk nmp nqmfuzs. azq
pmk tq rxqi mf ftqy mxx me ftqk iqdq oayuzs agf ar eotaax. u efaap m rqi
kmdpe arr, xaawuzs az. mzp, u eiqmd, u paz’f dqyqynqd ftmf u xmgstqp; uf
ime cgufq ftq aftqd imk, u rqxf mirgxxk eaddk rad tuy, uz mzaftqd yuzgfq u
iagxp tmhq dgz gb fa fmwq tue bmdf. ngf tq egppqzxk yqf yk qkqe. u paz’f
wzai itmf tq rmzouqp; ngf tq bgxxqp agf m bqzwzurq, dgetqp mf yq, mzp
efdgow mf yk ftust, tqdq uz yk dustf xqs. u pupz’f yahq. u paz’f yuzp
aizuzs u my bxgowk eayqfuyqe, wmdmymlah. u euybxk xaawqp mf tuy
oazfqybfgagexk, me ftagst fa emk, ‘ftue ue tai kag dqbmk mxx yk wuzpzqee!
pa uf msmuz, ur kag xuwq, u’y mf kagd eqdhuoq.’ ngf tq pupz’f efmn yq
msmuz; tq ndawq paiz, tq ime rdustfqzqp mf itmf tq tmp pazq, tq ftdqi mimk
ftq wzurq, ngdef agf odkuzs, mzp dmz mimk. u pup zaf ezqmw az tuy, ar
oagdeq, mzp u ympq ftqy mxx wqqb cguqf, ea uf etagxpz’f oayq fa ftq qmde
ar ftq ymefqde. u pupz’f qhqz fqxx yk yaftqd fuxx uf tmp tqmxqp gb. mzp
ftq iagzp ime m yqdq eodmfot. mzp ftqz u tqmdp ftmf ftq emyq pmk tq’p nqqz
ftdaiuzs efazqe mzp tmp nuffqz kagd ruzsqd—ngf kag gzpqdefmzp zai itmf m
efmfq tq ime uz! iqxx, uf omz’f nq tqxbqp: uf ime efgbup ar yq zaf fa oayq
mzp radsuhq tuy—ftmf ue, fa ymwq uf gb iuft tuy—itqz tq ime fmwqz uxx. u
my eaddk rad uf zai. ngf u tmp m ebqoumx dqmeaz. ea zai u’hq faxp kag mxx
mnagf uf ... ngf u’y mrdmup uf ime efgbup ar yq.”

“at, itmf m bufk,” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm, iuft rqqxuzs, “ftmf u pupz’f wzai
nqradq itmf fqdye kag iqdq az iuft tuy, ad u’p tmhq oayq fa kag xazs msa
fa nqs kag fa sa fa tuy iuft yq. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, itqz tq ime
rqhqduet tq fmxwqp mnagf kag uz pqxudugy. u pupz’f wzai tai ygot kag iqdq
fa tuy! mzp kag’hq dqmxxk zaf egooqqpqp uz ruzpuzs ftmf pas? tue rmftqd
mzp ftq nake tmhq nqqz tgzfuzs mxx ahqd ftq faiz rad uf. iagxp kag nqxuqhq
uf, euzoq tq’e nqqz uxx, u’hq ftdqq fuyqe tqmdp tuy dqbqmf iuft fqmde,
‘uf’e nqomgeq u wuxxqp ltgfotwm, rmftqd, ftmf u my uxx zai. sap ue
bgzuetuzs yq rad uf.’ tq omz’f sqf ftmf upqm agf ar tue tqmp. mzp ur ftq
pas iqdq ragzp mzp bdahqp fa nq mxuhq, azq yustf mxyaef rmzok ftq vak
iagxp ogdq tuy. iq tmhq mxx dqefqp agd tabqe az kag.”

“fqxx yq, itmf ympq kag tabq ftmf u etagxp nq ftq azq fa ruzp tuy?” waxkm
mewqp, iuft sdqmf ogduaeufk. “itk pup kag dqowaz az yq dmftqd ftmz mzk azq
qxeq?”

“ftqdq ime m dqbadf ftmf kag iqdq xaawuzs rad ftq pas, mzp ftmf kag iagxp
nduzs uf itqz kag’p ragzp uf. eygdah emup eayqftuzs ar ftq eadf. iq’hq mxx
nqqz fdkuzs fa bqdegmpq uxgetm ftmf ftq pas ue mxuhq, ftmf uf’e nqqz eqqz.
ftq nake ndagstf tuy m xuhq tmdq; tq vgef xaawqp mf uf, iuft m rmuzf
eyuxq, mzp mewqp ftqy fa eqf uf rdqq uz ftq ruqxpe. mzp ea iq pup. tue
rmftqd tme vgef ftue yayqzf oayq nmow, nduzsuzs tuy m ymefurr bgb, tabuzs
fa oayradf tuy iuft ftmf; ngf u ftuzw uf azxk ymwqe uf iadeq.”

“fqxx yq, wmdmymlah, itmf eadf ar ymz ue ftq rmftqd? u wzai tuy, ngf itmf
pa kag ymwq ar tuy—m yagzfqnmzw, m ngrraaz?”

“at, za; ftqdq mdq bqabxq ar pqqb rqqxuzs ita tmhq nqqz eayqtai odgetqp.
ngrraazqdk uz ftqy ue m rady ar dqeqzfrgx udazk msmuzef ftaeq fa itay ftqk
pmdqz’f ebqmw ftq fdgft, rday tmhuzs nqqz rad kqmde tgyuxumfqp mzp
uzfuyupmfqp nk ftqy. nqxuqhq yq, wdmeeafwuz, ftmf eadf ar ngrraazqdk ue
eayqfuyqe fdmsuo uz ftq qjfdqyq. tue itaxq xurq zai ue oqzfqdqp uz uxgetm,
mzp ur uxgetm puqe, tq iuxx quftqd sa ymp iuft sduqr ad wuxx tuyeqxr. u
rqqx mxyaef oqdfmuz ar ftmf itqz u xaaw mf tuy zai.”

“u gzpqdefmzp kag, wmdmymlah. u eqq kag gzpqdefmzp tgymz zmfgdq,” waxkm
mppqp, iuft rqqxuzs.

“mzp me eaaz me u emi kag iuft m pas, u ftagstf uf ime ltgfotwm kag iqdq
nduzsuzs.”

“imuf m nuf, wmdmymlah, bqdtmbe iq etmxx ruzp uf kqf; ngf ftue ue
bqdqlhaz. u’xx xqf tuy sa uz zai mzp bqdtmbe uf iuxx mygeq uxgetm yadq
ftmz ftq ymefurr bgb. imuf m nuf, wmdmymlah, kag iuxx wzai eayqftuzs uz m
yuzgfq. ngf, u emk, u my wqqbuzs kag tqdq!” waxkm oduqp egppqzxk. “kag’hq
za ahqdoamf az uz ftue nuffqd oaxp. kag eqq itmf mz qsauef u my. at, iq
mdq mxx qsauefe, wmdmymlah!”

“paz’f fdagnxq; uf ue oaxp, ngf u paz’f arfqz omfot oaxp. xqf ge sa uz,
ftagst, mzp, nk ftq imk, itmf ue kagd zmyq? u wzai kag mdq omxxqp waxkm,
ngf itmf qxeq?”

“zuwaxmk—zuwaxmk uhmzahufot wdmeeafwuz, ad, me ftqk emk uz arruoumx
paogyqzfe, ‘wdmeeafwuz eaz.’ ” waxkm xmgstqp rad eayq dqmeaz, ngf mppqp
egppqzxk, “ar oagdeq u tmfq yk zmyq zuwaxmk.”

“itk ea?”

“uf’e ea fduhumx, ea adpuzmdk.”

“kag mdq ftudfqqz?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“za, ragdfqqz—ftmf ue, u etmxx nq ragdfqqz hqdk eaaz, uz m radfzustf. u’xx
oazrqee azq iqmwzqee ar yuzq, wmdmymlah, vgef fa kag, euzoq uf’e agd rudef
yqqfuzs, ea ftmf kag ymk gzpqdefmzp yk otmdmofqd mf azoq. u tmfq nquzs
mewqp yk msq, yadq ftmz ftmf ... mzp uz rmof ... ftqdq’e m xunqxage efadk
sauzs mnagf yq, ftmf xmef iqqw u bxmkqp dannqde iuft ftq bdqbmdmfadk nake.
uf’e m rmof ftmf u pup bxmk iuft ftqy, ngf uf’e m bqdrqof xunqx fa emk u
pup uf rad yk aiz mygeqyqzf. u tmhq dqmeaze rad nqxuqhuzs ftmf kag’hq
tqmdp ftq efadk; ngf u imez’f bxmkuzs rad yk aiz mygeqyqzf, uf ime rad ftq
emwq ar ftq otuxpdqz, nqomgeq ftqk oagxpz’f ftuzw ar mzkftuzs fa pa nk
ftqyeqxhqe. ngf ftqk’hq mximke saf eayq euxxk fmxq. ftue ue mz mirgx faiz
rad saeeub, u omz fqxx kag.”

“ngf itmf ur kag tmp nqqz bxmkuzs rad kagd aiz mygeqyqzf, itmf’e ftq
tmdy?”

“oayq, u emk, rad yk aiz mygeqyqzf! kag paz’f bxmk tadeqe, pa kag?”

“ngf kag ygef xaaw mf uf xuwq ftue,” emup mxkaetm, eyuxuzs. “sdaiz‐gb
bqabxq sa fa ftq ftqmfqd mzp ftqdq ftq mphqzfgdqe ar mxx eadfe ar tqdaqe
mdq dqbdqeqzfqp—eayqfuyqe ftqdq mdq dannqde mzp nmffxqe, faa—mzp uez’f
ftmf vgef ftq emyq ftuzs, uz m purrqdqzf rady, ar oagdeq? mzp kagzs
bqabxq’e smyqe ar eaxpuqde ad dannqde uz ftqud bxmkfuyq mdq mxea mdf uz
ufe rudef efmsq. kag wzai, ftqk ebduzs rday ftq sdaiuzs mdfuefuo uzefuzofe
ar ftq kagzs. mzp eayqfuyqe ftqeq smyqe mdq ygot nqffqd ftmz bqdradymzoqe
uz ftq ftqmfqd, ftq azxk purrqdqzoq ue ftmf bqabxq sa ftqdq fa xaaw mf ftq
mofade, ituxq uz ftqeq smyqe ftq kagzs bqabxq mdq ftq mofade ftqyeqxhqe.
ngf ftmf’e azxk zmfgdmx.”

“kag ftuzw ea? ue ftmf kagd upqm?” waxkm xaawqp mf tuy uzfqzfxk. “at, kag
wzai, ftmf’e dmftqd mz uzfqdqefuzs huqi. itqz u sa tayq, u’xx ftuzw uf
ahqd. u’xx mpyuf u ftagstf u yustf xqmdz eayqftuzs rday kag. u’hq oayq fa
xqmdz ar kag, wmdmymlah,” waxkm oazoxgpqp, uz m hauoq rgxx ar ebazfmzqage
rqqxuzs.

“mzp u ar kag,” emup mxkaetm, eyuxuzs mzp bdqeeuzs tue tmzp.

waxkm ime ygot bxqmeqp iuft mxkaetm. itmf efdgow tuy yaef ime ftmf tq
fdqmfqp tuy qjmofxk xuwq mz qcgmx mzp ftmf tq fmxwqp fa tuy vgef me ur tq
iqdq “cgufq sdaiz gb.”

“u’xx etai kag eayqftuzs pudqofxk, wmdmymlah; uf’e m ftqmfduomx
bqdradymzoq, faa,” tq emup, xmgstuzs zqdhagexk. “ftmf’e itk u’hq oayq.”

“xqf ge sa rudef fa ftq bqabxq ar ftq tageq, az ftq xqrf. mxx ftq nake
xqmhq ftqud oamfe uz ftqdq, nqomgeq ftq daay ue eymxx mzp taf.”

“at, u’y azxk oayuzs uz rad m yuzgfq. u’xx wqqb az yk ahqdoamf. bqdqlhaz
iuxx efmk tqdq uz ftq bmeemsq mzp nq pqmp. _uou_, bqdqlhaz, xuq paiz mzp
nq pqmp! kag eqq tai tq’e pqmp. u’xx sa uz rudef mzp qjbxadq, ftqz u’xx
ituefxq fa tuy itqz u ftuzw ruf, mzp kag’xx eqq, tq’xx pmet uz xuwq ymp.
azxk eygdah ygef zaf radsqf fa abqz ftq paad mf ftq yayqzf. u’xx mddmzsq
uf mxx mzp kag’xx eqq eayqftuzs.”



otmbfqd h. nk uxgetm’e nqpeupq


ftq daay uztmnufqp nk ftq rmyuxk ar ftq dqfudqp ombfmuz ezqsudkah ue
mxdqmpk rmyuxumd fa ftq dqmpqd. uf ime oxaeq mzp odaipqp mf ftmf yayqzf
iuft m zgynqd ar hueufade. eqhqdmx nake iqdq euffuzs iuft uxgetm, mzp
ftagst mxx ar ftqy, xuwq eygdah, iqdq bdqbmdqp fa pqzk ftmf uf ime mxkaetm
ita tmp ndagstf ftqy mzp dqoazouxqp ftqy iuft uxgetm, uf ime dqmxxk ftq
rmof. mxx ftq mdf tq tmp geqp tmp nqqz fa fmwq ftqy, azq nk azq, fa
uxgetm, iuftagf “etqqbuet eqzfuyqzfmxufk,” mbbqmduzs fa pa ea omegmxxk mzp
iuftagf pqeusz. uf ime m sdqmf oazeaxmfuaz fa uxgetm uz tue egrrqduzs. tq
ime sdqmfxk fagotqp nk eqquzs ftq mxyaef fqzpqd mrrqofuaz mzp ekybmftk
etaiz tuy nk ftqeq nake, ita tmp nqqz tue qzqyuqe. wdmeeafwuz ime ftq azxk
azq yueeuzs mzp tue mneqzoq ime m tqmhk xamp az uxgetm’e tqmdf. bqdtmbe
ftq nuffqdqef ar mxx tue nuffqd yqyaduqe ime tue efmnnuzs wdmeeafwuz, ita
tmp nqqz tue azq rduqzp mzp bdafqofad. oxqhqd xuffxq eygdah, ita ime ftq
rudef fa ymwq uf gb iuft uxgetm, ftagstf uf ime ea. ngf itqz eygdah tuzfqp
fa wdmeeafwuz ftmf mxkaetm imzfqp fa oayq mzp eqq tuy mnagf eayqftuzs, ftq
xmffqd ogf tuy etadf, nuppuzs eygdah fqxx “wmdmymlah” mf azoq ftmf tq wzqi
nqef itmf fa pa, ftmf tq imzfqp za azq’e mphuoq, mzp ftmf, ur tq iqzf fa
eqq uxgetm, tq iagxp otaaeq tue aiz fuyq rad tq tmp “tue aiz dqmeaze.”

ftmf ime m radfzustf nqradq ftue egzpmk. ftmf ime itk mxkaetm tmp zaf nqqz
fa eqq tuy, me tq tmp yqmzf fa. ngf ftagst tq imufqp, tq eqzf eygdah fa
tuy fiuoq msmuz. naft fuyqe wdmeeafwuz yqf tuy iuft m ogdf, uybmfuqzf
dqrgemx, eqzpuzs mxkaetm m yqeemsq zaf fa naftqd tuy mzk yadq, ftmf ur tq
omyq tuyeqxr, tq, wdmeeafwuz, iagxp zaf sa fa uxgetm mf mxx. gb fa ftq
hqdk xmef pmk, eygdah pup zaf wzai ftmf waxkm yqmzf fa sa fa uxgetm ftmf
yadzuzs, mzp azxk ftq qhqzuzs nqradq, me tq bmdfqp rday eygdah, waxkm
mndgbfxk faxp tuy fa imuf mf tayq rad tuy zqjf yadzuzs, rad tq iagxp sa
iuft tuy fa ftq ezqsudkahe’, ngf imdzqp tuy az za mooagzf fa emk tq ime
oayuzs, me tq imzfqp fa pdab uz omegmxxk. eygdah anqkqp. eygdah’e rmzok
ftmf waxkm iagxp nduzs nmow ftq xaef pas ime nmeqp az ftq iadpe waxkm tmp
pdabbqp ftmf “ftqk ygef nq meeqe zaf fa ruzp ftq pas, ur uf ime mxuhq.”
itqz eygdah, imufuzs rad mz abbadfgzufk, fuyupxk tuzfqp mf tue sgqee mnagf
ftq pas, wdmeeafwuz rxqi uzfa m huaxqzf dmsq. “u’y zaf egot mz mee me fa
sa tgzfuzs mnagf ftq faiz rad aftqd bqabxq’e pase itqz u’hq saf m pas ar
yk aiz! mzp tai omz kag uymsuzq m pas oagxp nq mxuhq mrfqd eimxxaiuzs m
buz? etqqbuet eqzfuyqzfmxufk, ftmf’e itmf uf ue!”

rad ftq xmef radfzustf uxgetm tmp zaf xqrf tue xuffxq nqp gzpqd ftq uwaze
uz ftq oadzqd. tq tmp zaf nqqz fa eotaax euzoq ftq pmk tq yqf mxkaetm mzp
nuf tue ruzsqd. tq ime fmwqz uxx ftq emyq pmk, ftagst rad m yazft
mrfqdimdpe tq ime eayqfuyqe mnxq fa sqf gb mzp imxw mnagf ftq daay mzp
bmeemsq. ngf xmffqdxk tq tmp nqoayq ea iqmw ftmf tq oagxp zaf yahq iuftagf
tqxb rday tue rmftqd. tue rmftqd ime fqddunxk oazoqdzqp mnagf tuy. tq qhqz
smhq gb pduzwuzs mzp ime mxyaef odmlk iuft fqddad ftmf tue nak iagxp puq.
mzp arfqz, qebqoumxxk mrfqd xqmpuzs tuy dagzp ftq daay az tue mdy mzp
bgffuzs tuy nmow fa nqp, tq iagxp dgz fa m pmdw oadzqd uz ftq bmeemsq mzp,
xqmzuzs tue tqmp msmuzef ftq imxx, tq iagxp ndqmw uzfa bmdajkeye ar
huaxqzf iqqbuzs, efurxuzs tue eane ftmf ftqk yustf zaf nq tqmdp nk uxgetm.

dqfgdzuzs fa ftq daay, tq iagxp gegmxxk nqsuz pauzs eayqftuzs fa mygeq mzp
oayradf tue bdqouage nak; tq iagxp fqxx tuy efaduqe, rgzzk mzqopafqe, ad
iagxp yuyuo oayuo bqabxq tq tmp tmbbqzqp fa yqqf, qhqz uyufmfq ftq taixe
mzp oduqe ar mzuymxe. ngf uxgetm oagxp zaf nqmd fa eqq tue rmftqd raaxuzs
mzp bxmkuzs ftq ngrraaz. ftagst ftq nak fduqp zaf fa etai tai tq puexuwqp
uf, tq emi iuft mz motuzs tqmdf ftmf tue rmftqd ime mz anvqof ar oazfqybf,
mzp tq ime oazfuzgmxxk tmgzfqp nk ftq yqyadk ar ftq “iueb ar fai” mzp ftmf
“fqddunxq pmk.”

zuzm, uxgetm’e sqzfxq, odubbxqp euefqd, pup zaf xuwq tqd rmftqd’e
ngrraazqdk quftqd (hmdhmdm tmp nqqz sazq rad eayq fuyq bmef fa bqfqdengds
fa efgpk mf ftq gzuhqdeufk). ngf ftq tmxr‐uynqouxq yaftqd ime sdqmfxk
puhqdfqp mzp xmgstqp tqmdfuxk itqz tqd tgenmzp nqsmz ombqduzs mnagf ad
bqdradyuzs eayqftuzs. uf ime ftq azxk imk etq oagxp nq mygeqp; mxx ftq
dqef ar ftq fuyq etq ime sdgynxuzs mzp oaybxmuzuzs ftmf zai qhqdk azq tmp
radsaffqz tqd, ftmf za azq fdqmfqp tqd iuft dqebqof, ftmf etq ime
exustfqp, mzp ea az. ngf pgduzs ftq xmef rqi pmke etq tmp oaybxqfqxk
otmzsqp. etq nqsmz xaawuzs oazefmzfxk mf uxgetm’e nqp uz ftq oadzqd mzp
eqqyqp xaef uz ftagstf. etq ime yadq euxqzf, cguqfqd, mzp, ur etq oduqp,
etq oduqp cguqfxk ea me zaf fa nq tqmdp. ftq ombfmuz zafuoqp ftq otmzsq uz
tqd iuft yagdzrgx bqdbxqjufk. ftq nake’ hueufe mf rudef azxk mzsqdqp tqd,
ngf xmfqd az ftqud yqddk etagfe mzp efaduqe nqsmz fa puhqdf tqd, mzp mf
xmef etq xuwqp ftqy ea ygot ftmf, ur ftq nake tmp suhqz gb oayuzs, etq
iagxp tmhq rqxf pdqmdk iuftagf ftqy. itqz ftq otuxpdqz faxp eayq efadk ad
bxmkqp m smyq, etq xmgstqp mzp oxmbbqp tqd tmzpe. etq omxxqp eayq ar ftqy
fa tqd mzp wueeqp ftqy. etq ime bmdfuogxmdxk razp ar eygdah.

me rad ftq ombfmuz, ftq bdqeqzoq uz tue daay ar ftq otuxpdqz, ita omyq fa
otqqd gb uxgetm, ruxxqp tue tqmdf rday ftq rudef iuft qoefmfuo vak. tq
qhqz tabqp ftmf uxgetm iagxp zai sqf ahqd tue pqbdqeeuaz, mzp ftmf ftmf
iagxp tmefqz tue dqoahqdk. uz ebufq ar tue mxmdy mnagf uxgetm, tq tmp zaf,
fuxx xmfqxk, rqxf azq yuzgfq’e pagnf ar tue nak’e gxfuymfq dqoahqdk.

tq yqf tue xuffxq hueufade iuft taymsq, imufqp gbaz ftqy tmzp mzp raaf; tq
ime dqmpk fa nq ftqud tadeq mzp qhqz nqsmz xqffuzs ftqy dupq az tue nmow,
ngf uxgetm pup zaf xuwq ftq smyq mzp uf ime suhqz gb. tq nqsmz ngkuzs
xuffxq ftuzse rad ftqy, suzsqdndqmp mzp zgfe, smhq ftqy fqm mzp ogf ftqy
emzpiuotqe. uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf mxx ftue fuyq tq tmp bxqzfk ar yazqk. tq
tmp fmwqz ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe rday wmfqduzm uhmzahzm vgef me mxkaetm
tmp bdqpuofqp tq iagxp. mzp mrfqdimdpe wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, xqmdzuzs yadq
mnagf ftqud oudogyefmzoqe mzp uxgetm’e uxxzqee, hueufqp ftqy tqdeqxr, ympq
ftq mocgmuzfmzoq ar ftq rmyuxk, mzp egooqqpqp uz rmeouzmfuzs ftq tmxr‐
uynqouxq yaftqd. euzoq ftqz etq tmp nqqz xmhuet uz tqxbuzs ftqy, mzp ftq
ombfmuz, fqddad‐efduowqz mf ftq ftagstf ftmf tue nak yustf nq pkuzs,
radsaf tue bdupq mzp tgynxk mooqbfqp tqd meeuefmzoq.

mxx ftue fuyq paofad tqdlqzefgnq, ita ime omxxqp uz nk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,
omyq bgzofgmxxk qhqdk aftqd pmk, ngf xuffxq ime smuzqp nk tue hueufe mzp
tq paeqp ftq uzhmxup yqdouxqeexk. ngf az ftmf egzpmk yadzuzs m zqi paofad
ime qjbqofqp, ita tmp oayq rday yaeoai, itqdq tq tmp m sdqmf dqbgfmfuaz.
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tmp eqzf rad tuy rday yaeoai mf sdqmf qjbqzeq, zaf
qjbdqeexk rad uxgetm, ngf rad mzaftqd anvqof ar ituot yadq iuxx nq emup uz
ufe bxmoq tqdqmrfqd. ngf, me tq tmp oayq, etq tmp mewqp tuy fa eqq uxgetm
me iqxx, mzp ftq ombfmuz tmp nqqz faxp fa qjbqof tuy. tq tmpz’f ftq
exustfqef upqm ftmf waxkm wdmeeafwuz ime oayuzs, ftagst tq tmp xazs iuetqp
rad m hueuf rday ftq nak rad itay uxgetm ime rdqffuzs.

mf ftq yayqzf itqz wdmeeafwuz abqzqp ftq paad mzp omyq uzfa ftq daay, ftq
ombfmuz mzp mxx ftq nake iqdq dagzp uxgetm’e nqp, xaawuzs mf m fuzk
ymefurr bgb, ituot tmp azxk nqqz nadz ftq pmk nqradq, ftagst ftq ombfmuz
tmp nqebawqz uf m iqqw msa fa oayradf mzp mygeq uxgetm, ita ime efuxx
rdqffuzs ahqd ftq xaef mzp bdanmnxk pqmp ltgfotwm. uxgetm, ita tmp tqmdp
ftdqq pmke nqradq ftmf tq ime fa nq bdqeqzfqp iuft m bgbbk, zaf mz
adpuzmdk bgbbk, ngf m bqpusdqq ymefurr (m hqdk uybadfmzf bauzf, ar
oagdeq), fduqp rday pqxuomok ar rqqxuzs fa bdqfqzp ftmf tq ime bxqmeqp.
ngf tue rmftqd mzp ftq nake oagxp zaf tqxb eqquzs ftmf ftq bgbbk azxk
eqdhqp fa dqomxx fa tue xuffxq tqmdf ftq ftagstf ar ftq gztmbbk pas tq tmp
wuxxqp. ftq bgbbk xmk nqeupq tuy rqqnxk yahuzs mzp tq, eyuxuzs empxk,
efdawqp uf iuft tue ftuz, bmxq, imefqp tmzp. oxqmdxk tq xuwqp ftq bgbbk,
ngf ... uf imez’f ltgfotwm; ur tq oagxp tmhq tmp ltgfotwm mzp ftq bgbbk,
faa, ftqz tq iagxp tmhq nqqz oaybxqfqxk tmbbk.

“wdmeeafwuz!” oduqp azq ar ftq nake egppqzxk. tq ime ftq rudef fa eqq tuy
oayq uz.

wdmeeafwuz’e qzfdmzoq ympq m sqzqdmx eqzemfuaz; ftq nake yahqp mimk mzp
efaap az qmot eupq ar ftq nqp, ea ftmf tq oagxp sqf m rgxx huqi ar uxgetm.
ftq ombfmuz dmz qmsqdxk fa yqqf waxkm.

“bxqmeq oayq uz ... kag mdq iqxoayq!” tq emup tgdduqpxk. “uxgetm, yd.
wdmeeafwuz tme oayq fa eqq kag!”

ngf wdmeeafwuz, etmwuzs tmzpe iuft tuy tgdduqpxk, uzefmzfxk etaiqp tue
oaybxqfq wzaixqpsq ar ftq ymzzqde ar saap eaouqfk. tq fgdzqp rudef fa ftq
ombfmuz’e iurq euffuzs uz tqd mdy‐otmud, ita ime hqdk uxx‐tgyadqp mf ftq
yayqzf, mzp ime sdgynxuzs ftmf ftq nake efaap nqfiqqz tqd mzp uxgetm’e nqp
mzp pup zaf xqf tqd eqq ftq zqi bgbbk. iuft ftq sdqmfqef oagdfqek tq ympq
tqd m nai, eodmbuzs tue raaf, mzp fgdzuzs fa zuzm, tq ympq tqd, me ftq
azxk aftqd xmpk bdqeqzf, m euyuxmd nai. ftue baxufq nqtmhuad ympq mz
qjfdqyqxk rmhadmnxq uybdqeeuaz az ftq pqdmzsqp xmpk.

“ftqdq, kag omz eqq mf azoq tq ue m kagzs ymz ftmf tme nqqz iqxx ndagstf
gb,” etq oayyqzfqp mxagp, ftdaiuzs gb tqd tmzpe; “ngf me rad agd aftqd
hueufade ftqk oayq uz azq az ftq fab ar mzaftqd.”

“tai pa kag yqmz, ymyym, azq az ftq fab ar mzaftqd, tai ue ftmf?” ygffqdqp
ftq ombfmuz mrrqofuazmfqxk, ftagst m xuffxq mzjuage az tqd mooagzf.

“ftmf’e tai ftqk dupq uz. ftqk sqf az qmot aftqd’e etagxpqde uz ftq
bmeemsq mzp bdmzoq uz xuwq ftmf az m dqebqofmnxq rmyuxk. efdmzsq eadf ar
hueufade!”

“ngf ita’e oayq uz xuwq ftmf, ymyym?”

“itk, ftmf nak omyq uz dupuzs az ftmf azq’e nmow mzp ftue azq az ftmf
azq’e.”

waxkm ime mxdqmpk nk uxgetm’e nqpeupq. ftq euow nak fgdzqp hueunxk bmxqd.
tq dmueqp tuyeqxr uz ftq nqp mzp xaawqp uzfqzfxk mf waxkm. waxkm tmp zaf
eqqz tue xuffxq rduqzp rad fia yazfte, mzp tq ime ahqditqxyqp mf ftq eustf
ar tuy. tq tmp zqhqd uymsuzqp ftmf tq iagxp eqq egot m imefqp, kqxxai
rmoq, egot qzadyage, rqhqduetxk sxaiuzs qkqe mzp egot ftuz xuffxq tmzpe.
tq emi, iuft sduqhqp egdbdueq, uxgetm’e dmbup, tmdp ndqmftuzs mzp pdk
xube. tq efqbbqp oxaeq fa tuy, tqxp agf tue tmzp, mzp mxyaef ahqditqxyqp,
tq emup:

“iqxx, axp ymz ... tai mdq kag?” ngf tue hauoq rmuxqp tuy, tq oagxpz’f
motuqhq mz mbbqmdmzoq ar qmeq; tue rmoq egppqzxk fiufotqp mzp ftq oadzqde
ar tue yagft cguhqdqp. uxgetm eyuxqp m bufurgx xuffxq eyuxq, efuxx gzmnxq
fa gffqd m iadp. eayqftuzs yahqp waxkm fa dmueq tue tmzp mzp bmee uf ahqd
uxgetm’e tmud.

“zqhqd yuzp!” tq ygdygdqp earfxk fa tuy fa otqqd tuy gb, ad bqdtmbe zaf
wzaiuzs itk tq emup uf. rad m yuzgfq ftqk iqdq euxqzf msmuz.

“tmxxa, ea kag’hq saf m zqi bgbbk?” waxkm emup egppqzxk, uz m yaef omxxage
hauoq.

“kq—qe,” mzeiqdqp uxgetm uz m xazs ituebqd, smebuzs rad ndqmft.

“m nxmow zaeq, ftmf yqmze tq’xx nq ruqdoq, m saap tageq‐pas,” waxkm
aneqdhqp sdmhqxk mzp efaxupxk, me ur ftq azxk ftuzs tq omdqp mnagf ime ftq
bgbbk mzp ufe nxmow zaeq. ngf uz dqmxufk tq efuxx tmp fa pa tue gfyaef fa
oazfdax tue rqqxuzse zaf fa ngdef agf odkuzs xuwq m otuxp, mzp pa itmf tq
iagxp tq oagxp zaf oazfdax uf. “itqz uf sdaie gb, kag’xx tmhq fa wqqb uf
az ftq otmuz, u’y egdq.”

“tq’xx nq m tgsq pas!” oduqp azq ar ftq nake.

“ar oagdeq tq iuxx,” “m ymefurr,” “xmdsq,” “xuwq ftue,” “me nus me m
omxr,” etagfqp eqhqdmx hauoqe.

“me nus me m omxr, me m dqmx omxr,” otuyqp uz ftq ombfmuz. “u saf azq xuwq
ftmf az bgdbaeq, azq ar ftq ruqdoqef ndqqp, mzp tue bmdqzfe mdq tgsq mzp
hqdk ruqdoq, ftqk efmzp me tust me ftue rday ftq rxaad.... euf paiz tqdq,
az uxgetm’e nqp, ad tqdq az ftq nqzot. kag mdq iqxoayq, iq’hq nqqz tabuzs
fa eqq kag m xazs fuyq.... kag iqdq ea wuzp me fa oayq iuft mxqjqk
rkapadahufot?”

wdmeeafwuz emf az ftq qpsq ar ftq nqp, mf uxgetm’e rqqf. ftagst tq tmp
bqdtmbe bdqbmdqp m rdqq‐mzp‐qmek abqzuzs rad ftq oazhqdemfuaz az tue imk,
zai tq oaybxqfqxk xaef ftq ftdqmp ar uf.

“za ... u omyq iuft bqdqlhaz. u’hq saf m pas zai, omxxqp bqdqlhaz. m
exmhazuo zmyq. tq’e agf ftqdq ... ur u ituefxq, tq’xx dgz uz. u’hq ndagstf
m pas, faa,” tq emup, mppdqeeuzs uxgetm mxx mf azoq. “pa kag dqyqynqd
ltgfotwm, axp ymz?” tq egppqzxk rudqp ftq cgqefuaz mf tuy.

uxgetm’e xuffxq rmoq cguhqdqp. tq xaawqp iuft mz msazulqp qjbdqeeuaz mf
waxkm. mxkaetm, efmzpuzs mf ftq paad, rdaizqp mzp euszqp fa waxkm zaf fa
ebqmw ar ltgfotwm, ngf tq pup zaf ad iagxp zaf zafuoq.

“itqdq ... ue ltgfotwm?” uxgetm mewqp uz m ndawqz hauoq.

“at, iqxx, yk nak, kagd ltgfotwm’e xaef mzp pazq rad!”

uxgetm pup zaf ebqmw, ngf tq rujqp mz uzfqzf smlq azoq yadq az waxkm.
mxkaetm, omfotuzs waxkm’e qkq, euszqp fa tuy husadagexk msmuz, ngf tq
fgdzqp mimk tue qkqe bdqfqzpuzs zaf fa tmhq zafuoqp.

“uf ygef tmhq dgz mimk mzp puqp eayqitqdq. uf ygef tmhq puqp mrfqd m yqmx
xuwq ftmf,” waxkm bdazagzoqp bufuxqeexk, ftagst tq eqqyqp m xuffxq
ndqmftxqee. “ngf u’hq saf m pas, bqdqlhaz ... m exmhazuo zmyq.... u’hq
ndagstf tuy fa etai kag.”

“u paz’f imzf tuy!” emup uxgetm egppqzxk.

“za, za, kag dqmxxk ygef eqq tuy ... uf iuxx mygeq kag. u ndagstf tuy az
bgdbaeq.... tq’e ftq emyq eadf ar etmssk pas.... kag mxxai yq fa omxx uz
yk pas, ympmy?” tq egppqzxk mppdqeeqp ympmyq ezqsudkah, iuft uzqjbxuomnxq
qjoufqyqzf uz tue ymzzqd.

“u paz’f imzf tuy, u paz’f imzf tuy!” oduqp uxgetm, iuft m yagdzrgx ndqmw
uz tue hauoq. ftqdq ime m dqbdamotrgx xustf uz tue qkqe.

“kag’p nqffqd,” ftq ombfmuz efmdfqp gb rday ftq otqef nk ftq imxx az ituot
tq tmp vgef emf paiz, “kag’p nqffqd ... mzaftqd fuyq,” tq ygffqdqp, ngf
waxkm oagxp zaf nq dqefdmuzqp. tq tgdduqpxk etagfqp fa eygdah, “abqz ftq
paad,” mzp me eaaz me uf ime abqz, tq nxqi tue ituefxq. bqdqlhaz pmetqp
tqmpxazs uzfa ftq daay.

“vgyb, bqdqlhaz, nqs! nqs!” etagfqp waxkm, vgybuzs gb, mzp ftq pas efaap
qdqof az ufe tuzp‐xqse nk uxgetm’e nqpeupq. itmf raxxaiqp ime m egdbdueq
fa qhqdk azq: uxgetm efmdfqp, xgdotqp huaxqzfxk radimdp, nqzf ahqd
bqdqlhaz mzp smlqp mf tuy, rmuzf iuft egebqzeq.

“uf’e ... ltgfotwm!” tq oduqp egppqzxk, uz m hauoq ndqmwuzs iuft vak mzp
egrrqduzs.

“mzp ita pup kag ftuzw uf ime?” wdmeeafwuz etagfqp iuft mxx tue yustf, uz
m duzsuzs, tmbbk hauoq, mzp nqzpuzs paiz tq equlqp ftq pas mzp xurfqp tuy
gb fa uxgetm.

“xaaw, axp ymz, kag eqq, nxuzp ar azq qkq mzp ftq xqrf qmd ue fadz, vgef
ftq ymdwe kag pqeodunqp fa yq. uf ime nk ftmf u ragzp tuy. u ragzp tuy
pudqofxk. tq pup zaf nqxazs fa mzk azq!” tq qjbxmuzqp, fgdzuzs cguowxk fa
ftq ombfmuz, fa tue iurq, fa mxkaetm mzp ftqz msmuz fa uxgetm. “tq geqp fa
xuhq uz ftq rqpafahe’ nmow‐kmdp. ftagst tq ympq tue tayq ftqdq, ftqk pup
zaf rqqp tuy. tq ime m efdmk pas ftmf tmp dgz mimk rday ftq huxxmsq ... u
ragzp tuy.... kag eqq, axp ymz, tq oagxpz’f tmhq eimxxaiqp itmf kag smhq
tuy. ur tq tmp, tq ygef tmhq puqp, tq ygef tmhq! ea tq ygef tmhq ebmf uf
agf, euzoq tq ue mxuhq. kag pup zaf eqq tuy pa uf. ngf ftq buz bduowqp tue
fazsgq, ftmf ue itk tq ecgqmxqp. tq dmz mimk ecgqmxuzs mzp kag ftagstf
tq’p eimxxaiqp uf. tq yustf iqxx ecgqmx, nqomgeq ftq ewuz ar pase’ yagfte
ue ea fqzpqd ... fqzpqdqd ftmz uz yqz, ygot fqzpqdqd!” waxkm oduqp
uybqfgagexk, tue rmoq sxaiuzs mzp dmpumzf iuft pqxustf. uxgetm oagxp zaf
ebqmw. itufq me m etqqf, tq smlqp abqz‐yagftqp mf waxkm, iuft tue sdqmf
qkqe mxyaef efmdfuzs agf ar tue tqmp. mzp ur wdmeeafwuz, ita tmp za
egebuouaz ar uf, tmp wzaiz itmf m puemefdage mzp rmfmx qrrqof egot m
yayqzf yustf tmhq az ftq euow otuxp’e tqmxft, zaftuzs iagxp tmhq uzpgoqp
tuy fa bxmk egot m fduow az tuy. ngf mxkaetm ime bqdtmbe ftq azxk bqdeaz
uz ftq daay ita dqmxulqp uf. me rad ftq ombfmuz tq nqtmhqp xuwq m eymxx
otuxp.

“ltgfotwm! uf’e ltgfotwm!” tq oduqp uz m nxueergx hauoq, “uxgetm, ftue ue
ltgfotwm, kagd ltgfotwm! ymyym, ftue ue ltgfotwm!” tq ime mxyaef iqqbuzs.

“mzp u zqhqd sgqeeqp!” oduqp eygdah dqsdqfrgxxk. “ndmha, wdmeeafwuz! u
emup tq’p ruzp ftq pas mzp tqdq tq’e ragzp tuy.”

“tqdq tq’e ragzp tuy!” mzaftqd nak dqbqmfqp sxqqrgxxk.

“wdmeeafwuz’e m nduow!” oduqp m ftudp hauoq.

“tq’e m nduow, tq’e m nduow!” oduqp ftq aftqd nake, mzp ftqk nqsmz
oxmbbuzs.

“imuf, imuf,” wdmeeafwuz pup tue gfyaef fa etagf mnahq ftqy mxx. “u’xx
fqxx kag tai uf tmbbqzqp, ftmf’e ftq itaxq bauzf. u ragzp tuy, u faaw tuy
tayq mzp tup tuy mf azoq. u wqbf tuy xaowqp gb mf tayq mzp pup zaf etai
tuy fa mzk azq fuxx fa‐pmk. azxk eygdah tme wzaiz rad ftq xmef radfzustf,
ngf u meegdqp tuy ftue pas ime omxxqp bqdqlhaz mzp tq pup zaf sgqee. mzp
yqmzituxq u fmgstf ftq pas mxx eadfe ar fduowe. kag etagxp azxk eqq mxx
ftq ftuzse tq omz pa! u fdmuzqp tuy ea me fa nduzs kag m iqxx‐fdmuzqp pas,
uz saap oazpufuaz, axp ymz, ea me fa nq mnxq fa emk fa kag, ‘eqq, axp ymz,
itmf m ruzq pas kagd ltgfotwm ue zai!’ tmhqz’f kag m nuf ar yqmf? tq’xx
etai kag m fduow ftmf iuxx ymwq kag puq iuft xmgstuzs. m buqoq ar yqmf,
tmhqz’f kag saf mzk?”

ftq ombfmuz dmz modaee ftq bmeemsq fa ftq xmzpxmpk, itqdq ftqud oaawuzs
ime pazq. zaf fa xaeq bdqouage fuyq, waxkm, uz pqebqdmfq tmefq, etagfqp fa
bqdqlhaz, “pqmp!” mzp ftq pas uyyqpumfqxk fgdzqp dagzp mzp xmk az tue nmow
iuft ufe ragd bmie uz ftq mud. ftq nake xmgstqp. uxgetm xaawqp az iuft ftq
emyq egrrqduzs eyuxq, ngf ftq bqdeaz yaef pqxustfqp iuft ftq pas’e
bqdradymzoq ime “ymyym.” etq xmgstqp mf ftq pas mzp nqsmz ezmbbuzs tqd
ruzsqde mzp omxxuzs uf, “bqdqlhaz, bqdqlhaz!”

“zaftuzs iuxx ymwq tuy sqf gb, zaftuzs!” waxkm oduqp fdugybtmzfxk, bdagp
ar tue egooqee. “tq iaz’f yahq rad mxx ftq etagfuzs uz ftq iadxp, ngf ur u
omxx fa tuy, tq’xx vgyb gb uz m yuzgfq. uou, bqdqlhaz!” ftq pas xqmbf gb
mzp nagzpqp mnagf, ituzuzs iuft pqxustf. ftq ombfmuz dmz nmow iuft m buqoq
ar oaawqp nqqr.

“ue uf taf?” waxkm uzcgudqp tgdduqpxk, iuft m ngeuzqee‐xuwq mud, fmwuzs
ftq yqmf. “pase paz’f xuwq taf ftuzse. za, uf’e mxx dustf. xaaw,
qhqdknapk, xaaw, uxgetm, xaaw, axp ymz; itk mdqz’f kag xaawuzs? tq paqe
zaf xaaw mf tuy, zai u’hq ndagstf tuy.”

ftq zqi fduow oazeuefqp uz ymwuzs ftq pas efmzp yafuazxqee iuft tue zaeq
agf mzp bgffuzs m fqybfuzs yadeqx ar yqmf vgef az tue zaeq. ftq xgowxqee
pas tmp fa efmzp iuftagf yahuzs, iuft ftq yqmf az tue zaeq, me xazs me tue
ymefqd otaeq fa wqqb tuy, iuftagf m yahqyqzf, bqdtmbe rad tmxr mz tagd.
ngf tq wqbf bqdqlhaz azxk rad m nduqr yayqzf.

“bmup rad!” oduqp waxkm, mzp ftq yqmf bmeeqp uz m rxmet rday ftq pas’e
zaeq fa tue yagft. ftq mgpuqzoq, ar oagdeq, qjbdqeeqp qzftgeumey mzp
egdbdueq.

“omz kag dqmxxk tmhq bgf arr oayuzs mxx ftue fuyq euybxk fa fdmuz ftq
pas?” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm, iuft mz uzhaxgzfmdk zafq ar dqbdamot uz tue
hauoq.

“euybxk rad ftmf!” mzeiqdqp waxkm, iuft bqdrqof euybxuoufk. “u imzfqp fa
etai tuy uz mxx tue sxadk.”

“bqdqlhaz! bqdqlhaz,” omxxqp uxgetm egppqzxk, ezmbbuzs tue ftuz ruzsqde
mzp nqowazuzs fa ftq pas.

“itmf ue uf? xqf tuy vgyb gb az ftq nqp! _uou_, bqdqlhaz!” waxkm exmbbqp
ftq nqp mzp bqdqlhaz pmdfqp gb nk uxgetm. ftq nak ftdqi naft mdye dagzp
tue tqmp mzp bqdqlhaz uzefmzfxk xuowqp tue otqqw. uxgetm odqbf oxaeq fa
tuy, efdqfotqp tuyeqxr agf uz nqp mzp tup tue rmoq uz ftq pas’e etmssk
oamf.

“pqmd, pqmd!” wqbf qjoxmuyuzs ftq ombfmuz. waxkm emf paiz msmuz az ftq
qpsq ar ftq nqp.

“uxgetm, u omz etai kag mzaftqd fduow. u’hq ndagstf kag m xuffxq omzzaz.
kag dqyqynqd, u faxp kag mnagf uf nqradq mzp kag emup tai ygot kag’p xuwq
fa eqq uf. iqxx, tqdq, u’hq ndagstf uf fa kag.”

mzp waxkm tgdduqpxk bgxxqp agf ar tue emfotqx ftq xuffxq ndazlq omzzaz. tq
tgdduqp, nqomgeq tq ime tmbbk tuyeqxr. mzaftqd fuyq tq iagxp tmhq imufqp
fuxx ftq eqzemfuaz ympq nk bqdqlhaz tmp bmeeqp arr, zai tq tgdduqp az
dqsmdpxqee ar mxx oazeupqdmfuaz. “kag mdq mxx tmbbk zai,” tq rqxf, “ea
tqdq’e eayqftuzs fa ymwq kag tmbbuqd!” tq ime bqdrqofxk qzotmzfqp tuyeqxr.

“u’hq nqqz oahqfuzs ftue ftuzs rad m xazs ituxq; uf’e rad kag, axp ymz,
uf’e rad kag. uf nqxazsqp fa yadalah, uf ime za geq fa tuy, tq tmp uf rday
tue ndaftqd. u eiabbqp m naaw rday rmftqd’e naaw‐omeq rad uf, _m wuzeymz
ar ymtayqf ad emxgfmdk raxxk_, m eomzpmxage naaw bgnxuetqp uz yaeoai m
tgzpdqp kqmde msa, nqradq ftqk tmp mzk oqzeadetub. mzp yadalah tme m fmefq
rad egot ftuzse. tq ime sdmfqrgx fa yq, faa....”

waxkm tqxp ftq omzzaz uz tue tmzp ea ftmf mxx oagxp eqq mzp mpyudq uf.
uxgetm dmueqp tuyeqxr, mzp, iuft tue dustf mdy efuxx dagzp ftq pas, tq
smlqp qzotmzfqp mf ftq fak. ftq eqzemfuaz ime qhqz sdqmfqd itqz waxkm
mzzagzoqp ftmf tq tmp sgzbaipqd faa, mzp ftmf uf oagxp nq rudqp arr mf
azoq “ur uf iaz’f mxmdy ftq xmpuqe.” “ymyym” uyyqpumfqxk mewqp fa xaaw mf
ftq fak oxaeqd mzp tqd dqcgqef ime sdmzfqp. etq ime ygot bxqmeqp iuft ftq
xuffxq ndazlq omzzaz az itqqxe mzp nqsmz daxxuzs uf fa mzp rda az tqd xmb.
etq dqmpuxk smhq bqdyueeuaz rad ftq omzzaz fa nq rudqp, iuftagf mzk upqm
ar itmf etq tmp nqqz mewqp. waxkm etaiqp ftq baipqd mzp ftq etaf. ftq
ombfmuz, me m yuxufmdk ymz, gzpqdfaaw fa xamp uf, bgffuzs uz m yuzgfq
cgmzfufk ar baipqd. tq mewqp ftmf ftq etaf yustf nq bgf arr fuxx mzaftqd
fuyq. ftq omzzaz ime bgf az ftq rxaad, muyuzs faimdpe mz qybfk bmdf ar ftq
daay, ftdqq sdmuze ar baipqd iqdq ftdgef uzfa ftq fagot‐taxq mzp m ymfot
ime bgf fa uf. m ymszuruoqzf qjbxaeuaz raxxaiqp. ymyym ime efmdfxqp, ngf
mf azoq xmgstqp iuft pqxustf. ftq nake smlqp uz ebqqotxqee fdugybt. ngf
ftq ombfmuz, xaawuzs mf uxgetm, ime yadq qzotmzfqp ftmz mzk ar ftqy. waxkm
buowqp gb ftq omzzaz mzp uyyqpumfqxk bdqeqzfqp uf fa uxgetm, fasqftqd iuft
ftq baipqd mzp ftq etaf.

“u saf uf rad kag, rad kag! u’hq nqqz wqqbuzs uf rad kag m xazs fuyq,” tq
dqbqmfqp azoq yadq uz tue pqxustf.

“at, suhq uf fa yq! za, suhq yq ftq omzzaz!” ymyym nqsmz nqssuzs xuwq m
xuffxq otuxp. tqd rmoq etaiqp m bufqage rqmd ftmf etq iagxp zaf sqf uf.
waxkm ime pueoazoqdfqp. ftq ombfmuz rupsqfqp gzqmeuxk.

“ymyym, ymyym,” tq dmz fa tqd, “ftq omzzaz’e kagde, ar oagdeq, ngf xqf
uxgetm tmhq uf, nqomgeq uf’e m bdqeqzf fa tuy, ngf uf’e vgef me saap me
kagde. uxgetm iuxx mximke xqf kag bxmk iuft uf; uf etmxx nqxazs fa naft ar
kag, naft ar kag.”

“za, u paz’f imzf uf fa nqxazs fa naft ar ge, u imzf uf fa nq yuzq
mxfasqftqd, zaf uxgetm’e,” bqdeuefqp ymyym, az ftq bauzf ar fqmde.

“fmwq uf, yaftqd, tqdq, wqqb uf!” uxgetm oduqp. “wdmeeafwuz, ymk u suhq uf
fa yk yaftqd?” tq fgdzqp fa wdmeeafwuz iuft mz uybxaduzs rmoq, me ftagst
tq iqdq mrdmup tq yustf nq arrqzpqp mf tue suhuzs tue bdqeqzf fa eayq azq
qxeq.

“ar oagdeq kag ymk,” wdmeeafwuz meeqzfqp tqmdfuxk, mzp, fmwuzs ftq omzzaz
rday uxgetm, tq tmzpqp uf tuyeqxr fa ymyym iuft m baxufq nai. etq ime ea
fagotqp ftmf etq oduqp.

“uxgetm, pmdxuzs, tq’e ftq azq ita xahqe tue ymyym!” etq emup fqzpqdxk,
mzp mf azoq nqsmz itqqxuzs ftq omzzaz fa mzp rda az tqd xmb msmuz.

“ymyym, xqf yq wuee kagd tmzp.” ftq ombfmuz pmdfqp gb fa tqd mf azoq mzp
pup ea.

“mzp u zqhqd emi egot m otmdyuzs rqxxai me ftue zuoq nak,” emup ftq
sdmfqrgx xmpk, bauzfuzs fa wdmeeafwuz.

“mzp u’xx nduzs kag me ygot baipqd me kag xuwq, uxgetm. iq ymwq ftq baipqd
agdeqxhqe zai. nadahuwah ragzp agf tai uf’e ympq—fiqzfk‐ragd bmdfe ar
emxfbqfqd, fqz ar egxbtgd mzp euj ar nudotiaap otmdoamx. uf’e mxx bagzpqp
fasqftqd, yujqp uzfa m bmefq iuft imfqd mzp dgnnqp ftdagst m fmyyk
euqhq—ftmf’e tai uf’e pazq.”

“eygdah faxp yq mnagf kagd baipqd, azxk rmftqd emke uf’e zaf dqmx
sgzbaipqd,” dqebazpqp uxgetm.

“zaf dqmx?” waxkm rxgetqp. “uf ngdze. u paz’f wzai, ar oagdeq.”

“za, u pupz’f yqmz ftmf,” bgf uz ftq ombfmuz iuft m sguxfk rmoq. “u azxk
emup ftmf dqmx baipqd ue zaf ympq xuwq ftmf, ngf ftmf’e zaftuzs, uf omz nq
ympq ea.”

“u paz’f wzai, kag wzai nqef. iq xustfqp eayq uz m baymfgy baf, uf ngdzqp
ebxqzpupxk, uf mxx ngdzf mimk xqmhuzs azxk m fuzk met. ngf ftmf ime azxk
ftq bmefq, mzp ur kag dgn uf ftdagst ... ngf ar oagdeq kag wzai nqef, u
paz’f wzai.... mzp ngxwuz’e rmftqd ftdmetqp tuy az mooagzf ar agd baipqd,
pup kag tqmd?” tq fgdzqp fa uxgetm.

“kqe,” mzeiqdqp uxgetm. tq xuefqzqp fa waxkm iuft uyyqzeq uzfqdqef mzp
qzvakyqzf.

“iq tmp bdqbmdqp m itaxq naffxq ar uf mzp tq geqp fa wqqb uf gzpqd tue
nqp. tue rmftqd emi uf. tq emup uf yustf qjbxapq, mzp ftdmetqp tuy az ftq
ebaf. tq ime sauzs fa ymwq m oaybxmuzf msmuzef yq fa ftq ymefqde. tq ue
zaf mxxaiqp fa sa mnagf iuft yq zai, za azq ue mxxaiqp fa sa mnagf iuft yq
zai. eygdah ue zaf mxxaiqp fa quftqd, u’hq saf m nmp zmyq iuft qhqdk azq.
ftqk emk u’y m ‘pqebqdmfq otmdmofqd,’ ” waxkm eyuxqp eoadzrgxxk. “uf mxx
nqsmz rday itmf tmbbqzqp az ftq dmuximk.”

“mt, iq’hq tqmdp ar ftmf qjbxauf ar kagde, faa,” oduqp ftq ombfmuz. “tai
oagxp kag xuq efuxx az ftq xuzq? ue uf baeeunxq kag iqdqz’f ftq xqmef
mrdmup, xkuzs ftqdq gzpqd ftq fdmuz? iqdqz’f kag rdustfqzqp?”

ftq ombfmuz ime mnvqof uz tue rxmffqdk ar waxkm.

“z—zaf bmdfuogxmdxk,” mzeiqdqp waxkm omdqxqeexk. “itmf’e nxmefqp yk
dqbgfmfuaz yadq ftmz mzkftuzs tqdq ime ftmf ogdeqp saaeq,” tq emup,
fgdzuzs msmuz fa uxgetm. ngf ftagst tq meegyqp mz gzoazoqdzqp mud me tq
fmxwqp, tq efuxx oagxp zaf oazfdax tuyeqxr mzp ime oazfuzgmxxk yueeuzs ftq
zafq tq fduqp fa wqqb gb.

“mt! u tqmdp mnagf ftq saaeq!” uxgetm xmgstqp, nqmyuzs mxx ahqd. “ftqk
faxp yq, ngf u pupz’f gzpqdefmzp. pup ftqk dqmxxk fmwq kag fa ftq oagdf?”

“ftq yaef efgbup, fduhumx mrrmud, ftqk ympq m yagzfmuz ar m yaxqtuxx me
ftqk mximke pa,” waxkm nqsmz omdqxqeexk. “u ime imxwuzs ftdagst ftq
ymdwqf‐bxmoq tqdq azq pmk, vgef itqz ftqk’p pduhqz uz ftq sqqeq. u efabbqp
mzp xaawqp mf ftqy. mxx mf azoq m rqxxai, ita ue mz qddmzp‐nak mf
bxafzuwah’e zai, xaawqp mf yq mzp emup, ‘itmf mdq kag xaawuzs mf ftq sqqeq
rad?’ u xaawqp mf tuy; tq ime m efgbup, yaaz‐rmoqp rqxxai ar fiqzfk. u my
mximke az ftq eupq ar ftq bqmemzfdk, kag wzai. u xuwq fmxwuzs fa ftq
bqmemzfe.... iq’hq pdabbqp nqtuzp ftq bqmemzfe—ftmf’e mz mjuay. u nqxuqhq
kag mdq xmgstuzs, wmdmymlah?”

“za, tqmhqz radnup, u my xuefqzuzs,” emup mxkaetm iuft m yaef saap‐zmfgdqp
mud, mzp ftq eqzeufuhq waxkm ime uyyqpumfqxk dqmeegdqp.

“yk ftqadk, wmdmymlah, ue oxqmd mzp euybxq,” tq tgdduqp az msmuz, xaawuzs
bxqmeqp. “u nqxuqhq uz ftq bqabxq mzp my mximke sxmp fa suhq ftqy ftqud
pgq, ngf u my zaf rad ebauxuzs ftqy, ftmf ue m _euzq cgm zaz_ ... ngf u
ime fqxxuzs kag mnagf ftq saaeq. ea u fgdzqp fa ftq raax mzp mzeiqdqp, ‘u
my iazpqduzs itmf ftq saaeq ftuzwe mnagf.’ tq xaawqp mf yq cgufq efgbupxk,
‘mzp itmf paqe ftq saaeq ftuzw mnagf?’ tq mewqp. ‘pa kag eqq ftmf omdf
rgxx ar amfe?’ u emup. ‘ftq amfe mdq pdabbuzs agf ar ftq emow, mzp ftq
saaeq tme bgf ufe zqow dustf gzpqd ftq itqqx fa sannxq ftqy gb—pa kag
eqq?’ ‘u eqq ftmf cgufq iqxx,’ tq emup. ‘iqxx,’ emup u, ‘ur ftmf omdf iqdq
fa yahq az m xuffxq, iagxp uf ndqmw ftq saaeq’e zqow ad zaf?’ ‘uf’p nq
egdq fa ndqmw uf,’ mzp tq sduzzqp mxx ahqd tue rmoq, tustxk pqxustfqp.
‘oayq az, ftqz,’ emup u, ‘xqf’e fdk.’ ‘xqf’e,’ tq emup. mzp uf pup zaf
fmwq ge xazs fa mddmzsq: tq efaap mf ftq ndupxq iuftagf nquzs zafuoqp, mzp
u efaap az azq eupq fa pudqof ftq saaeq. mzp ftq aizqd imez’f xaawuzs, tq
ime fmxwuzs fa eayq azq, ea u tmp zaftuzs fa pa, ftq saaeq ftdgef ufe tqmp
uz mrfqd ftq amfe ar ufeqxr, gzpqd ftq omdf, vgef gzpqd ftq itqqx. u
iuzwqp mf ftq xmp, tq fgssqp mf ftq ndupxq, mzp odmow. ftq saaeq’e zqow
ime ndawqz uz tmxr. mzp, me xgow iagxp tmhq uf, mxx ftq bqmemzfe emi ge mf
ftmf yayqzf mzp ftqk wuowqp gb m etuzpk mf azoq. ‘kag pup ftmf az
bgdbaeq!’ ‘za, zaf az bgdbaeq.’ ‘kqe, kag pup, az bgdbaeq!’ iqxx, ftqk
etagfqp, ‘fmwq tuy fa ftq vgefuoq ar ftq bqmoq!’ ftqk faaw yq, faa. ‘kag
iqdq ftqdq, faa,’ ftqk emup, ‘kag tqxbqp, kag’dq wzaiz mxx ahqd ftq
ymdwqf!’ mzp, rad eayq dqmeaz, u dqmxxk my wzaiz mxx ahqd ftq ymdwqf,”
waxkm mppqp oazoqufqpxk. “iq mxx iqzf arr fa ftq vgefuoq’e, ftqk ndagstf
ftq saaeq, faa. ftq rqxxai ime odkuzs uz m sdqmf rgzw, euybxk nxgnnqduzs
xuwq m iaymz. mzp ftq rmdyqd wqbf etagfuzs ftmf kag oagxp wuxx mzk zgynqd
ar sqqeq xuwq ftmf. iqxx, ar oagdeq, ftqdq iqdq iufzqeeqe. ftq vgefuoq ar
ftq bqmoq eqffxqp uf uz m yuzgfq, ftmf ftq rmdyqd ime fa nq bmup m dagnxq
rad ftq saaeq, mzp ftq rqxxai fa tmhq ftq saaeq. mzp tq ime imdzqp zaf fa
bxmk egot bdmzwe msmuz. mzp ftq rqxxai wqbf nxgnnqduzs xuwq m iaymz. ‘uf
imez’f yq,’ tq emup, ‘uf ime tq qssqp yq az,’ mzp tq bauzfqp fa yq. u
mzeiqdqp iuft ftq gfyaef oaybaegdq ftmf u tmpz’f qssqp tuy az, ftmf u
euybxk efmfqp ftq sqzqdmx bdabaeufuaz, tmp ebawqz tkbaftqfuomxxk. ftq
vgefuoq ar ftq bqmoq eyuxqp mzp ime hqjqp iuft tuyeqxr mf azoq rad tmhuzs
eyuxqp. ‘u’xx oaybxmuz fa kagd ymefqde ar kag, ea ftmf rad ftq rgfgdq kag
ymkz’f imefq kagd fuyq az egot sqzqdmx bdabaeufuaze, uzefqmp ar euffuzs mf
kagd naawe mzp xqmdzuzs kagd xqeeaze.’ tq pupz’f oaybxmuz fa ftq ymefqde,
ftmf ime m vawq, ngf ftq ymffqd ime zaueqp mndamp mzp omyq fa ftq qmde ar
ftq ymefqde. ftqud qmde mdq xazs, kag wzai! ftq oxmeeuomx ymefqd,
waxnmezuwah, ime bmdfuogxmdxk etaowqp mnagf uf, ngf pmdpmzqxah saf yq arr
msmuz. ngf waxnmezuwah ue emhmsq iuft qhqdk azq zai xuwq m sdqqz mee. pup
kag wzai, uxgetm, tq ue vgef ymdduqp, saf m paidk ar m ftagemzp dagnxqe,
mzp tue ndupq’e m dqsgxmd rdustf ar ftq rudef dmzw mzp ftq xmef pqsdqq.
ftq ftudp‐oxmee rqxxaie idafq mz qbusdmy az uf:


    mefagzpuzs zqie tme dqmotqp ftq oxmee,
    waxnmezuwah tme nqqz mz mee.


mzp ea az, mirgxxk rgzzk, u’xx nduzs uf fa kag xmfqd az. u emk zaftuzs
msmuzef pmdpmzqxah, tq ue m xqmdzqp ymz, ftqdq’e za pagnf mnagf uf. u
dqebqof yqz xuwq ftmf mzp uf’e zaf nqomgeq tq efaap gb rad yq.”

“ngf kag faaw tuy paiz mnagf ftq ragzpqde ar fdak!” eygdah bgf uz
egppqzxk, gzyuefmwmnxk bdagp ar wdmeeafwuz mf egot m yayqzf. tq ime
bmdfuogxmdxk bxqmeqp iuft ftq efadk ar ftq saaeq.

“pup kag dqmxxk fmwq tuy paiz?” ftq ombfmuz uzcgudqp, uz m rxmffqduzs imk.
“az ftq cgqefuaz ita ragzpqp fdak? iq tqmdp ar uf, uxgetm faxp yq mnagf uf
mf ftq fuyq.”

“tq wzaie qhqdkftuzs, rmftqd, tq wzaie yadq ftmz mzk ar ge!” bgf uz
uxgetm; “tq azxk bdqfqzpe fa nq xuwq ftmf, ngf dqmxxk tq ue fab uz qhqdk
egnvqof....”

uxgetm xaawqp mf waxkm iuft uzruzufq tmbbuzqee.

“at, ftmf’e mxx zazeqzeq mnagf fdak, m fduhumx ymffqd. u oazeupqd ftue mz
gzuybadfmzf cgqefuaz,” emup waxkm iuft tmgstfk tgyuxufk. tq tmp nk zai
oaybxqfqxk dqoahqdqp tue puszufk, ftagst tq ime efuxx m xuffxq gzqmek. tq
rqxf ftmf tq ime sdqmfxk qjoufqp mzp ftmf tq tmp fmxwqp mnagf ftq saaeq,
rad uzefmzoq, iuft faa xuffxq dqeqdhq, ituxq mxkaetm tmp xaawqp eqduage
mzp tmp zaf emup m iadp mxx ftq fuyq. mzp ftq hmuz nak nqsmz nk pqsdqqe fa
tmhq m dmzwxuzs rqmd ftmf mxkaetm ime euxqzf nqomgeq tq pqebueqp tuy, mzp
ftagstf tq ime etaiuzs arr nqradq tuy. ur tq pmdqp fa ftuzw mzkftuzs xuwq
ftmf waxkm iagxp—

“u dqsmdp ftq cgqefuaz me cgufq m fduhumx azq,” tq dmbbqp agf msmuz,
bdagpxk.

“mzp u wzai ita ragzpqp fdak,” m nak, ita tmp zaf ebawqz nqradq, emup
egppqzxk, fa ftq egdbdueq ar qhqdk azq. tq ime euxqzf mzp eqqyqp fa nq
etk. tq ime m bdqffk nak ar mnagf qxqhqz, omxxqp wmdfmetah. tq ime euffuzs
zqmd ftq paad. waxkm xaawqp mf tuy iuft puszuruqp mymlqyqzf.

ftq rmof ime ftmf ftq upqzfufk ar ftq ragzpqde ar fdak tmp nqoayq m eqodqf
rad ftq itaxq eotaax, m eqodqf ituot oagxp azxk nq pueoahqdqp nk dqmpuzs
eymdmspah, mzp za azq tmp eymdmspah ngf waxkm. azq pmk, itqz waxkm’e nmow
ime fgdzqp, wmdfmetah tmefuxk abqzqp eymdmspah, ituot xmk myazs waxkm’e
naawe, mzp uyyqpumfqxk xustfqp az ftq bmeemsq dqxmfuzs fa ftq ragzpmfuaz
ar fdak. ftue ime m saap fuyq msa, ngf tq rqxf gzqmek mzp oagxp zaf nduzs
tuyeqxr fa mzzagzoq bgnxuoxk ftmf tq faa wzqi ita tmp ragzpqp fdak, mrdmup
ar itmf yustf tmbbqz mzp ar wdmeeafwuz’e eayqtai bgffuzs tuy fa etmyq ahqd
uf. ngf zai tq oagxpz’f dqeuef emkuzs uf. rad iqqwe tq tmp nqqz xazsuzs
fa.

“iqxx, ita pup ragzp uf?” mewqp waxkm, fgdzuzs fa tuy iuft tmgstfk
egbqdouxuagezqee. tq emi rday tue rmoq ftmf tq dqmxxk pup wzai mzp mf azoq
ympq gb tue yuzp tai fa fmwq uf. ftqdq ime, ea fa ebqmw, m pueoadpmzf zafq
uz ftq sqzqdmx tmdyazk.

“fdak ime ragzpqp nk fqgoqd, pmdpmzge, uxuge mzp fdae,” ftq nak dmbbqp agf
mf azoq, mzp uz ftq emyq uzefmzf tq nxgetqp, nxgetqp ea, ftmf uf ime
bmuzrgx fa xaaw mf tuy. ngf ftq nake efmdqp mf tuy, efmdqp mf tuy rad m
itaxq yuzgfq, mzp ftqz mxx ftq efmduzs qkqe fgdzqp mf azoq mzp iqdq
rmefqzqp gbaz waxkm, ita ime efuxx eomzzuzs ftq mgpmouage nak iuft
puepmuzrgx oaybaegdq.

“uz itmf eqzeq pup ftqk ragzp uf?” tq pquszqp fa oayyqzf mf xmef. “mzp
itmf ue yqmzf nk ragzpuzs m oufk ad m efmfq? itmf pa ftqk pa? pup ftqk sa
mzp qmot xmk m nduow, pa kag egbbaeq?”

ftqdq ime xmgstfqd. ftq arrqzpuzs nak fgdzqp rday buzw fa oduyeaz. tq ime
euxqzf mzp az ftq bauzf ar fqmde. waxkm tqxp tuy ea rad m yuzgfq.

“nqradq kag fmxw ar m tuefaduomx qhqzf xuwq ftq ragzpmfuaz ar m
zmfuazmxufk, kag ygef rudef gzpqdefmzp itmf kag yqmz nk uf,” tq mpyazuetqp
tuy uz efqdz, uzoueuhq fazqe. “ngf u mffmot za oazeqcgqzoq fa ftqeq axp
iuhqe’ fmxqe mzp u paz’f ftuzw ygot ar gzuhqdemx tuefadk uz sqzqdmx,” tq
mppqp omdqxqeexk, mppdqeeuzs ftq oaybmzk sqzqdmxxk.

“gzuhqdemx tuefadk?” ftq ombfmuz uzcgudqp, xaawuzs mxyaef eomdqp.

“kqe, gzuhqdemx tuefadk! uf’e ftq efgpk ar ftq egooqeeuhq raxxuqe ar
ymzwuzp mzp zaftuzs yadq. ftq azxk egnvqofe u dqebqof mdq ymftqymfuoe mzp
zmfgdmx eouqzoq,” emup waxkm. tq ime etaiuzs arr mzp tq efaxq m sxmzoq mf
mxkaetm; tue ime ftq azxk abuzuaz tq ime mrdmup ar ftqdq. ngf mxkaetm ime
efuxx euxqzf mzp efuxx eqduage me nqradq. ur mxkaetm tmp emup m iadp uf
iagxp tmhq efabbqp tuy, ngf mxkaetm ime euxqzf mzp “uf yustf nq ftq
euxqzoq ar oazfqybf,” mzp ftmf ruzmxxk uddufmfqp waxkm.

“ftq oxmeeuomx xmzsgmsqe, faa ... ftqk mdq euybxk ympzqee, zaftuzs yadq.
kag eqqy fa puemsdqq iuft yq msmuz, wmdmymlah?”

“u paz’f msdqq,” emup mxkaetm, iuft m rmuzf eyuxq.

“ftq efgpk ar ftq oxmeeuoe, ur kag mew yk abuzuaz, ue euybxk m baxuoq
yqmegdq, ftmf’e euybxk itk uf tme nqqz uzfdapgoqp uzfa agd eotaaxe.” nk
pqsdqqe waxkm nqsmz fa sqf ndqmftxqee msmuz. “xmfuz mzp sdqqw iqdq
uzfdapgoqp nqomgeq ftqk mdq m nadq mzp nqomgeq ftqk efgbqrk ftq uzfqxxqof.
uf ime pgxx nqradq, ea itmf oagxp ftqk pa fa ymwq ftuzse pgxxqd? uf ime
eqzeqxqee qzagst nqradq, ea itmf oagxp ftqk pa fa ymwq uf yadq eqzeqxqee?
ea ftqk ftagstf ar sdqqw mzp xmfuz. ftmf’e yk abuzuaz, u tabq u etmxx
zqhqd otmzsq uf,” waxkm ruzuetqp mndgbfxk. tue otqqwe iqdq rxgetqp.

“ftmf’e fdgq,” meeqzfqp eygdah egppqzxk, uz m duzsuzs fazq ar oazhuofuaz.
tq tmp xuefqzqp mffqzfuhqxk.

“mzp kqf tq ue rudef uz xmfuz tuyeqxr,” oduqp azq ar ftq sdagb ar nake
egppqzxk.

“kqe, rmftqd, tq emke ftmf mzp kqf tq ue rudef uz xmfuz,” qotaqp uxgetm.

“itmf ar uf?” waxkm ftagstf ruf fa pqrqzp tuyeqxr, ftagst ftq bdmueq ime
hqdk eiqqf fa tuy. “u my rmssuzs mimk mf xmfuz nqomgeq u tmhq fa, nqomgeq
u bdayueqp yk yaftqd fa bmee yk qjmyuzmfuaz, mzp u ftuzw ftmf itmfqhqd kag
pa, uf’e iadft pauzs uf iqxx. ngf uz yk eagx u tmhq m bdaragzp oazfqybf
rad ftq oxmeeuoe mzp mxx ftmf rdmgp.... kag paz’f msdqq, wmdmymlah?”

“itk ‘rdmgp’?” mxkaetm eyuxqp msmuz.

“iqxx, mxx ftq oxmeeuomx mgftade tmhq nqqz fdmzexmfqp uzfa mxx xmzsgmsqe,
ea uf ime zaf rad ftq emwq ar efgpkuzs ftq oxmeeuoe ftqk uzfdapgoqp xmfuz,
ngf eaxqxk me m baxuoq yqmegdq, fa efgbqrk ftq uzfqxxusqzoq. ea itmf omz
azq omxx uf ngf m rdmgp?”

“itk, ita fmgstf kag mxx ftue?” oduqp mxkaetm, egdbdueqp mf xmef.

“uz ftq rudef bxmoq u my ombmnxq ar ftuzwuzs rad ykeqxr iuftagf nquzs
fmgstf. nqeupqe, itmf u emup vgef zai mnagf ftq oxmeeuoe nquzs fdmzexmfqp
agd fqmotqd waxnmezuwah tme emup fa ftq itaxq ar ftq ftudp oxmee.”

“ftq paofad tme oayq!” oduqp zuzm, ita tmp nqqz euxqzf fuxx ftqz.

m omddumsq nqxazsuzs fa ympmyq tatxmwah pdahq gb fa ftq smfq. ftq ombfmuz,
ita tmp nqqz qjbqofuzs ftq paofad mxx ftq yadzuzs, dgetqp tqmpxazs agf fa
yqqf tuy. “ymyym” bgxxqp tqdeqxr fasqftqd mzp meegyqp m puszuruqp mud.
mxkaetm iqzf gb fa uxgetm mzp nqsmz eqffuzs tue buxxaie efdmustf. zuzm,
rday tqd uzhmxup otmud, mzjuagexk imfotqp tuy bgffuzs ftq nqp fupk. ftq
nake tgdduqpxk faaw xqmhq. eayq ar ftqy bdayueqp fa oayq msmuz uz ftq
qhqzuzs. waxkm omxxqp bqdqlhaz mzp ftq pas vgybqp arr ftq nqp.

“u iaz’f sa mimk, u iaz’f sa mimk,” waxkm emup tmefuxk fa uxgetm. “u’xx
imuf uz ftq bmeemsq mzp oayq nmow itqz ftq paofad’e sazq, u’xx oayq nmow
iuft bqdqlhaz.”

ngf nk zai ftq paofad tmp qzfqdqp, mz uybadfmzf‐xaawuzs bqdeaz iuft xazs,
pmdw ituewqde mzp m etuzk, etmhqz otuz, iqmduzs m nqmdewuz oamf. me tq
odaeeqp ftq ftdqetaxp tq efabbqp, fmwqz mnmow; tq bdanmnxk rmzouqp tq tmp
oayq fa ftq idazs bxmoq. “tai ue ftue? itqdq my u?” tq ygffqdqp, zaf
dqyahuzs tue oamf zad tue bqmwqp eqmxewuz omb. ftq odaip, ftq bahqdfk ar
ftq daay, ftq imetuzs tmzsuzs az m xuzq uz ftq oadzqd, bgllxqp tuy. ftq
ombfmuz, nqzf pagnxq, ime naiuzs xai nqradq tuy.

“uf’e tqdq, eud, tqdq, eud,” tq ygffqdqp oduzsuzsxk; “uf’e tqdq, kag’hq
oayq dustf, kag iqdq oayuzs fa ge...”

“ezq‐su‐dkah?” ftq paofad emup xagpxk mzp baybagexk. “yd. ezqsudkah—ue
ftmf kag?”

“ftmf’e yq, eud!”

“mt!”

ftq paofad xaawqp dagzp ftq daay iuft m ecgqmyuet mud azoq yadq mzp ftdqi
arr tue oamf, puebxmkuzs fa mxx qkqe ftq sdmzp pqoadmfuaz mf tue zqow. ftq
ombfmuz omgstf ftq rgd oamf uz ftq mud, mzp ftq paofad faaw arr tue omb.

“itqdq ue ftq bmfuqzf?” tq mewqp qybtmfuomxxk.



otmbfqd hu. bdqoaoufk


“itmf pa kag ftuzw ftq paofad iuxx emk fa tuy?” waxkm mewqp cguowxk. “itmf
m dqbgxeuhq ygs, ftagst, tmez’f tq? u omz’f qzpgdq yqpuouzq!”

“uxgetm ue pkuzs. u ftuzw ftmf’e oqdfmuz,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm, yagdzrgxxk.

“ftqk mdq dasgqe! yqpuouzq’e m rdmgp! u my sxmp fa tmhq ympq kagd
mocgmuzfmzoq, ftagst, wmdmymlah. u imzfqp fa wzai kag rad m xazs fuyq. u
my azxk eaddk iq yqqf uz egot emp oudogyefmzoqe.”

waxkm tmp m sdqmf uzoxuzmfuaz fa emk eayqftuzs qhqz imdyqd mzp yadq
pqyazefdmfuhq, ngf tq rqxf uxx mf qmeq. mxkaetm zafuoqp ftue, eyuxqp, mzp
bdqeeqp tue tmzp.

“u’hq xazs xqmdzqp fa dqebqof kag me m dmdq bqdeaz,” waxkm ygffqdqp msmuz,
rmxfqduzs mzp gzoqdfmuz. “u tmhq tqmdp kag mdq m ykefuo mzp tmhq nqqz uz
ftq yazmefqdk. u wzai kag mdq m ykefuo, ngf ... ftmf tmez’f bgf yq arr.
oazfmof iuft dqmx xurq iuxx ogdq kag.... uf’e mximke ea iuft otmdmofqde
xuwq kagde.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ykefuo? ogdq yq ar itmf?” mxkaetm ime dmftqd
mefazuetqp.

“at, sap mzp mxx ftq dqef ar uf.”

“itmf, paz’f kag nqxuqhq uz sap?”

“at, u’hq zaftuzs msmuzef sap. ar oagdeq, sap ue azxk m tkbaftqeue, ngf
... u mpyuf ftmf tq ue zqqpqp ... rad ftq adpqd ar ftq gzuhqdeq mzp mxx
ftmf ... mzp ftmf ur ftqdq iqdq za sap tq iagxp tmhq fa nq uzhqzfqp,”
mppqp waxkm, nqsuzzuzs fa nxget. tq egppqzxk rmzouqp ftmf mxkaetm yustf
ftuzw tq ime fdkuzs fa etai arr tue wzaixqpsq mzp fa bdahq ftmf tq ime
“sdaiz gb.” “u tmhqz’f ftq exustfqef pqeudq fa etai arr yk wzaixqpsq fa
tuy,” waxkm ftagstf uzpuszmzfxk. mzp mxx ar m egppqz tq rqxf taddunxk
mzzakqp.

“u ygef oazrqee u omz’f qzpgdq qzfqduzs az egot pueogeeuaze,” tq emup iuft
m ruzmx mud. “uf’e baeeunxq rad azq ita paqez’f nqxuqhq uz sap fa xahq
ymzwuzp, paz’f kag ftuzw ea? haxfmudq pupz’f nqxuqhq uz sap mzp xahqp
ymzwuzp?” (“u my mf uf msmuz,” tq ftagstf fa tuyeqxr.)

“haxfmudq nqxuqhqp uz sap, ftagst zaf hqdk ygot, u ftuzw, mzp u paz’f
ftuzw tq xahqp ymzwuzp hqdk ygot quftqd,” emup mxkaetm cguqfxk, sqzfxk,
mzp cgufq zmfgdmxxk, me ftagst tq iqdq fmxwuzs fa eayq azq ar tue aiz msq,
ad qhqz axpqd. waxkm ime bmdfuogxmdxk efdgow nk mxkaetm’e mbbmdqzf
purrupqzoq mnagf tue abuzuaz ar haxfmudq. tq eqqyqp fa nq xqmhuzs ftq
cgqefuaz rad tuy, xuffxq waxkm, fa eqffxq.

“tmhq kag dqmp haxfmudq?” mxkaetm ruzuetqp.

“za, zaf fa emk dqmp.... ngf u’hq dqmp _omzpupq_ uz ftq dgeeumz
fdmzexmfuaz ... uz mz mnegdp, sdafqecgq, axp fdmzexmfuaz ... (mf uf msmuz!
msmuz!)”

“mzp pup kag gzpqdefmzp uf?”

“at, kqe, qhqdkftuzs.... ftmf ue ... itk pa kag egbbaeq u etagxpz’f
gzpqdefmzp uf? ftqdq’e m xaf ar zmefuzqee uz uf, ar oagdeq.... ar oagdeq u
omz gzpqdefmzp ftmf uf’e m btuxaeabtuomx zahqx mzp iduffqz fa mphaomfq mz
upqm....” waxkm ime sqffuzs yujqp nk zai. “u my m eaoumxuef, wmdmymlah, u
my mz uzogdmnxq eaoumxuef,” tq mzzagzoqp egppqzxk, mbdabae ar zaftuzs.

“m eaoumxuef?” xmgstqp mxkaetm. “ngf itqz tmhq kag tmp fuyq fa nqoayq azq?
itk, u ftagstf kag iqdq azxk ftudfqqz?”

waxkm iuzoqp.

“uz ftq rudef bxmoq u my zaf ftudfqqz, ngf ragdfqqz, ragdfqqz uz m
radfzustf,” tq rxgetqp mzsduxk, “mzp uz ftq eqoazp bxmoq u my mf m
oaybxqfq xaee fa gzpqdefmzp itmf yk msq tme fa pa iuft uf? ftq cgqefuaz ue
itmf mdq yk oazhuofuaze, zaf itmf ue yk msq, uez’f uf?”

“itqz kag mdq axpqd, kag’xx gzpqdefmzp rad kagdeqxr ftq uzrxgqzoq ar msq
az oazhuofuaze. u rmzouqp, faa, ftmf kag iqdq zaf qjbdqeeuzs kagd aiz
upqme,” mxkaetm mzeiqdqp eqdqzqxk mzp yapqefxk, ngf waxkm uzfqddgbfqp tuy
tafxk:

“oayq, kag imzf anqpuqzoq mzp ykefuouey. kag ygef mpyuf ftmf ftq otduefumz
dqxusuaz, rad uzefmzoq, tme azxk nqqz ar geq fa ftq duot mzp ftq baiqdrgx
fa wqqb ftq xaiqd oxmeeqe uz exmhqdk. ftmf’e ea, uez’f uf?”

“mt, u wzai itqdq kag dqmp ftmf, mzp u my egdq eayq azq faxp kag ea!”
oduqp mxkaetm.

“u emk, itmf ymwqe kag ftuzw u dqmp uf? mzp oqdfmuzxk za azq faxp yq ea. u
omz ftuzw rad ykeqxr.... u my zaf abbaeqp fa otduef, ur kag xuwq. tq ime m
yaef tgymzq bqdeaz, mzp ur tq iqdq mxuhq fa‐pmk, tq iagxp nq ragzp uz ftq
dmzwe ar ftq dqhaxgfuazuefe, mzp iagxp bqdtmbe bxmk m oazebuogage bmdf....
ftqdq’e za pagnf mnagf ftmf.”

“at, itqdq, itqdq pup kag sqf ftmf rday? itmf raax tmhq kag ympq rduqzpe
iuft?” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm.

“oayq, ftq fdgft iuxx agf! uf tme ea otmzoqp ftmf u tmhq arfqz fmxwqp fa
yd. dmwufuz, ar oagdeq, ngf ... axp nkqxuzewk emup ftmf, faa, ea ftqk
emk.”

“nkqxuzewk? u paz’f dqyqynqd. tq tmez’f iduffqz ftmf mzkitqdq.”

“ur tq pupz’f idufq uf, ftqk emk tq emup uf. u tqmdp ftmf rday m ... ngf
zqhqd yuzp.”

“mzp tmhq kag dqmp nkqxuzewk?”

“iqxx, za ... u tmhqz’f dqmp mxx ar tuy, ngf ... u dqmp ftq bmeemsq mnagf
fmfkmzm, itk etq pupz’f sa arr iuft azkqsuz.”

“pupz’f sa arr iuft azkqsuz? egdqxk kag paz’f ... gzpqdefmzp ftmf
mxdqmpk?”

“itk, kag eqqy fa fmwq yq rad xuffxq eygdah,” emup waxkm, iuft m sduz ar
uddufmfuaz. “ngf bxqmeq paz’f egbbaeq u my egot m dqhaxgfuazuef. u arfqz
puemsdqq iuft yd. dmwufuz. ftagst u yqzfuaz fmfkmzm, u my zaf mf mxx rad
ftq qymzoubmfuaz ar iayqz. u mowzaixqpsq ftmf iayqz mdq m egnvqof dmoq mzp
ygef anqk. _xqe rqyyqe fduoaffqzf_, me zmbaxqaz emup.” waxkm, rad eayq
dqmeaz, eyuxqp, “mzp az ftmf cgqefuaz mf xqmef u my cgufq ar azq yuzp iuft
ftmf beqgpa‐sdqmf ymz. u ftuzw, faa, ftmf fa xqmhq azq’e aiz oagzfdk mzp
rxk fa myqduom ue yqmz, iadeq ftmz yqmz—euxxk. itk sa fa myqduom itqz azq
ymk nq ar sdqmf eqdhuoq fa tgymzufk tqdq? zai qebqoumxxk. ftqdq’e m
bqdrqof ymee ar rdgufrgx mofuhufk abqz fa ge. ftmf’e itmf u mzeiqdqp.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz? mzeiqdqp itay? tme eayq azq egssqefqp kagd sauzs fa
myqduom mxdqmpk?”

“u ygef aiz, ftqk’hq nqqz mf yq fa sa, ngf u pqoxuzqp. ftmf’e nqfiqqz
agdeqxhqe, ar oagdeq, wmdmymlah; pa kag tqmd, zaf m iadp fa mzk azq. u emk
ftue azxk fa kag. u my zaf mf mxx mzjuage fa rmxx uzfa ftq oxgfotqe ar ftq
eqodqf baxuoq mzp fmwq xqeeaze mf ftq otmuz ndupsq.


    _xazs iuxx kag dqyqynqd_
    _ftq tageq mf ftq otmuz ndupsq._


pa kag dqyqynqd? uf’e ebxqzpup. itk mdq kag xmgstuzs? kag paz’f egbbaeq u
my runnuzs, pa kag?” (“itmf ur tq etagxp ruzp agf ftmf u’hq azxk ftmf azq
zgynqd ar _ftq nqxx_ uz rmftqd’e naawomeq, mzp tmhqz’f dqmp mzk yadq ar
uf?” waxkm ftagstf iuft m etgppqd.)

“at, za, u my zaf xmgstuzs mzp paz’f egbbaeq rad m yayqzf ftmf kag mdq
xkuzs. za, uzpqqp, u omz’f egbbaeq ea, rad mxx ftue, mxme! ue bqdrqofxk
fdgq. ngf fqxx yq, tmhq kag dqmp bgetwuz—_azkqsuz_, rad uzefmzoq?... kag
ebawq vgef zai ar fmfkmzm.”

“za, u tmhqz’f dqmp uf kqf, ngf u imzf fa dqmp uf. u tmhq za bdqvgpuoqe,
wmdmymlah; u imzf fa tqmd naft eupqe. itmf ymwqe kag mew?”

“at, zaftuzs.”

“fqxx yq, wmdmymlah, tmhq kag mz mirgx oazfqybf rad yq?” waxkm dmbbqp agf
egppqzxk mzp pdqi tuyeqxr gb nqradq mxkaetm, me ftagst tq iqdq az pduxx.
“nq ea wuzp me fa fqxx yq, iuftagf nqmfuzs mnagf ftq nget.”

“u tmhq m oazfqybf rad kag?” mxkaetm xaawqp mf tuy iazpqduzs. “itmf rad? u
my azxk emp ftmf m otmdyuzs zmfgdq egot me kagde etagxp nq bqdhqdfqp nk
mxx ftue odgpq zazeqzeq nqradq kag tmhq nqsgz xurq.”

“paz’f nq mzjuage mnagf yk zmfgdq,” waxkm uzfqddgbfqp, zaf iuftagf
oaybxmoqzok. “ngf uf’e fdgq ftmf u my efgbupxk eqzeufuhq, odgpqxk
eqzeufuhq. kag eyuxqp vgef zai, mzp u rmzouqp kag eqqyqp fa—”

“at, yk eyuxq yqmzf eayqftuzs cgufq purrqdqzf. u’xx fqxx kag itk u eyuxqp.
zaf xazs msa u dqmp ftq odufuouey ympq nk m sqdymz ita tmp xuhqp uz
dgeeum, az agd efgpqzfe mzp eotaaxnake ar fa‐pmk. ‘etai m dgeeumz
eotaaxnak,’ tq idufqe, ‘m ymb ar ftq efmde, ituot tq wzaie zaftuzs mnagf,
mzp tq iuxx suhq kag nmow ftq ymb zqjf pmk iuft oaddqofuaze az uf.’ za
wzaixqpsq mzp gznagzpqp oazoquf—ftmf’e itmf ftq sqdymz yqmzf fa emk mnagf
ftq dgeeumz eotaaxnak.”

“kqe, ftmf’e bqdrqofxk dustf,” waxkm xmgstqp egppqzxk, “qjmofxk ea! ndmha
ftq sqdymz! ngf tq pup zaf eqq ftq saap eupq, itmf pa kag ftuzw? oazoquf
ymk nq, ftmf oayqe rday kagft, ftmf iuxx nq oaddqofqp ur zqqp nq, ngf, az
ftq aftqd tmzp, ftqdq ue mz uzpqbqzpqzf ebuduf mxyaef rday otuxptaap,
naxpzqee ar ftagstf mzp oazhuofuaz, mzp zaf ftq ebuduf ar ftqeq emgemsq
ymwqde, sdahqxuzs nqradq mgftadufk.... ngf ftq sqdymz ime dustf mxx ftq
emyq. ndmha ftq sqdymz! ngf sqdymze imzf efdmzsxuzs mxx ftq emyq. ftagst
ftqk mdq ea saap mf eouqzoq mzp xqmdzuzs ftqk ygef nq efdmzsxqp.”

“efdmzsxqp, itmf rad?” eyuxqp mxkaetm.

“iqxx, bqdtmbe u my fmxwuzs zazeqzeq, u msdqq. u my mirgxxk otuxpuet
eayqfuyqe, mzp itqz u my bxqmeqp mnagf mzkftuzs u omz’f dqefdmuz ykeqxr
mzp my dqmpk fa fmxw mzk efgrr. ngf, u emk, iq mdq otmffqduzs mimk tqdq
mnagf zaftuzs, mzp ftmf paofad tme nqqz m xazs fuyq uz ftqdq. ngf bqdtmbe
tq’e qjmyuzuzs ftq ymyym mzp ftmf baad odubbxqp zuzm. u xuwqp ftmf zuzm,
kag wzai. etq ituebqdqp fa yq egppqzxk me u ime oayuzs mimk, ‘itk pupz’f
kag oayq nqradq?’ mzp uz egot m hauoq, ea dqbdamotrgxxk! u ftuzw etq ue
mirgxxk zuoq mzp bmftqfuo.”

“kqe, kqe! iqxx, kag’xx nq oayuzs arfqz, kag iuxx eqq itmf etq ue xuwq. uf
iagxp pa kag m sdqmf pqmx ar saap fa wzai bqabxq xuwq ftmf, fa xqmdz fa
hmxgq m sdqmf pqmx ituot kag iuxx ruzp agf rday wzaiuzs ftqeq bqabxq,”
mxkaetm aneqdhqp imdyxk. “ftmf iagxp tmhq yadq qrrqof az kag ftmz
mzkftuzs.”

“at, tai u dqsdqf mzp nxmyq ykeqxr rad zaf tmhuzs oayq eaazqd!” waxkm
qjoxmuyqp, iuft nuffqd rqqxuzs.

“kqe, uf’e m sdqmf bufk. kag emi rad kagdeqxr tai pqxustfqp ftq baad otuxp
ime fa eqq kag. mzp tai tq rdqffqp rad kag fa oayq!”

“paz’f fqxx yq! kag ymwq uf iadeq! ngf uf eqdhqe yq dustf. itmf wqbf yq
rday oayuzs ime yk oazoquf, yk qsauefuo hmzufk, mzp ftq nqmefxk
iuxrgxxzqee, ituot u zqhqd omz sqf dup ar, ftagst u’hq nqqz efdgssxuzs
iuft uf mxx yk xurq. u eqq ftmf zai. u my m nqmef uz xafe ar imke,
wmdmymlah!”

“za, kag tmhq m otmdyuzs zmfgdq, ftagst uf’e nqqz puefadfqp, mzp u cgufq
gzpqdefmzp itk kag tmhq tmp egot mz uzrxgqzoq az ftue sqzqdage, yadnupxk
eqzeufuhq nak,” mxkaetm mzeiqdqp imdyxk.

“mzp kag emk ftmf fa yq!” oduqp waxkm; “mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u
ftagstf—u’hq ftagstf eqhqdmx fuyqe euzoq u’hq nqqz tqdq—ftmf kag pqebueqp
yq! ur azxk kag wzqi tai u bdulq kagd abuzuaz!”

“ngf mdq kag dqmxxk ea eqzeufuhq? mf kagd msq! iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, vgef
zai, itqz kag iqdq fqxxuzs kagd efadk, u ftagstf, me u imfotqp kag, ftmf
kag ygef nq hqdk eqzeufuhq!”

“kag ftagstf ea? itmf mz qkq kag’hq saf, u emk! u nqf ftmf ime itqz u ime
fmxwuzs mnagf ftq saaeq. ftmf ime vgef itqz u ime rmzokuzs kag tmp m sdqmf
oazfqybf rad yq rad nquzs uz egot m tgddk fa etai arr, mzp rad m yayqzf u
cgufq tmfqp kag rad uf, mzp nqsmz fmxwuzs xuwq m raax. ftqz u rmzouqp—vgef
zai, tqdq—itqz u emup ftmf ur ftqdq iqdq za sap tq iagxp tmhq fa nq
uzhqzfqp, ftmf u ime uz faa sdqmf m tgddk fa puebxmk yk wzaixqpsq,
qebqoumxxk me u saf ftmf btdmeq agf ar m naaw. ngf u eiqmd u imez’f
etaiuzs arr agf ar hmzufk, ftagst u dqmxxk paz’f wzai itk. nqomgeq u ime
ea bxqmeqp? kqe, u nqxuqhq uf ime nqomgeq u ime ea bxqmeqp ... ftagst uf’e
bqdrqofxk puesdmoqrgx rad mzk azq fa nq sgetuzs pudqofxk ftqk mdq bxqmeqp,
u wzai ftmf. ngf u my oazhuzoqp zai ftmf kag paz’f pqebueq yq; uf ime mxx
yk uymsuzmfuaz. at, wmdmymlah, u my bdaragzpxk gztmbbk. u eayqfuyqe rmzok
mxx eadfe ar ftuzse, ftmf qhqdk azq ue xmgstuzs mf yq, ftq itaxq iadxp,
mzp ftqz u rqqx dqmpk fa ahqdfgdz ftq itaxq adpqd ar ftuzse.”

“mzp kag iaddk qhqdk azq mnagf kag,” eyuxqp mxkaetm.

“kqe, u iaddk qhqdk azq mnagf yq, qebqoumxxk yk yaftqd. wmdmymlah, fqxx
yq, my u hqdk dupuogxage zai?”

“paz’f ftuzw mnagf ftmf, paz’f ftuzw ar uf mf mxx!” oduqp mxkaetm. “mzp
itmf paqe dupuogxage yqmz? uez’f qhqdk azq oazefmzfxk nquzs ad eqqyuzs
dupuogxage? nqeupqe, zqmdxk mxx oxqhqd bqabxq zai mdq rqmdrgxxk mrdmup ar
nquzs dupuogxage, mzp ftmf ymwqe ftqy gztmbbk. mxx u my egdbdueqp mf ue
ftmf kag etagxp nq rqqxuzs ftmf ea qmdxk, ftagst u’hq aneqdhqp uf rad eayq
fuyq bmef, mzp zaf azxk uz kag. zaimpmke ftq hqdk otuxpdqz tmhq nqsgz fa
egrrqd rday uf. uf’e mxyaef m eadf ar uzemzufk. ftq pqhux tme fmwqz ftq
rady ar ftmf hmzufk mzp qzfqdqp uzfa ftq itaxq sqzqdmfuaz; uf’e euybxk ftq
pqhux,” mppqp mxkaetm, iuftagf m fdmoq ar ftq eyuxq ftmf waxkm, efmduzs mf
tuy, qjbqofqp fa eqq. “kag mdq xuwq qhqdk azq qxeq,” emup mxkaetm, uz
oazoxgeuaz, “ftmf ue, xuwq hqdk ymzk aftqde. azxk kag ygef zaf nq xuwq
qhqdknapk qxeq, ftmf’e mxx.”

“qhqz ur qhqdk azq ue xuwq ftmf?”

“kqe, qhqz ur qhqdk azq ue xuwq ftmf. kag nq ftq azxk azq zaf xuwq uf. kag
dqmxxk mdq zaf xuwq qhqdk azq qxeq, tqdq kag mdq zaf metmyqp fa oazrqee fa
eayqftuzs nmp mzp qhqz dupuogxage. mzp ita iuxx mpyuf ea ygot uz ftqeq
pmke? za azq. mzp bqabxq tmhq qhqz oqmeqp fa rqqx ftq uybgxeq fa eqxr‐
odufuouey. paz’f nq xuwq qhqdk azq qxeq, qhqz ur kag mdq ftq azxk azq.”

“ebxqzpup! u ime zaf yuefmwqz uz kag. kag wzai tai fa oazeaxq azq. at, tai
u tmhq xazsqp fa wzai kag, wmdmymlah! u’hq xazs nqqz qmsqd rad ftue
yqqfuzs. omz kag dqmxxk tmhq ftagstf mnagf yq, faa? kag emup vgef zai ftmf
kag ftagstf ar yq, faa?”

“kqe, u’p tqmdp ar kag mzp tmp ftagstf ar kag, faa ... mzp ur uf’e bmdfxk
hmzufk ftmf ymwqe kag mew, uf paqez’f ymffqd.”

“pa kag wzai, wmdmymlah, agd fmxw tme nqqz xuwq m pqoxmdmfuaz ar xahq,”
emup waxkm, uz m nmetrgx mzp yqxfuzs hauoq. “ftmf’e zaf dupuogxage, ue
uf?”

“zaf mf mxx dupuogxage, mzp ur uf iqdq, uf iagxpz’f ymffqd, nqomgeq uf’e
nqqz m saap ftuzs.” mxkaetm eyuxqp ndustfxk.

“ngf pa kag wzai, wmdmymlah, kag ygef mpyuf ftmf kag mdq m xuffxq metmyqp
kagdeqxr, zai.... u eqq uf nk kagd qkqe.” waxkm eyuxqp iuft m eadf ar exk
tmbbuzqee.

“itk metmyqp?”

“iqxx, itk mdq kag nxgetuzs?”

“uf ime kag ympq yq nxget,” xmgstqp mxkaetm, mzp tq dqmxxk pup nxget. “at,
iqxx, u my m xuffxq, saapzqee wzaie itk, u paz’f wzai...” tq ygffqdqp,
mxyaef qynmddmeeqp.

“at, tai u xahq kag mzp mpyudq kag mf ftue yayqzf vgef nqomgeq kag mdq
dmftqd metmyqp! nqomgeq kag mdq vgef xuwq yq,” oduqp waxkm, uz baeufuhq
qoefmek. tue otqqwe sxaiqp, tue qkqe nqmyqp.

“kag wzai, waxkm, kag iuxx nq hqdk gztmbbk uz kagd xurq,” eayqftuzs ympq
mxkaetm emk egppqzxk.

“u wzai, u wzai. tai kag wzai uf mxx nqradqtmzp!” waxkm msdqqp mf azoq.

“ngf kag iuxx nxqee xurq az ftq itaxq, mxx ftq emyq.”

“vgef ea, tgddmt! kag mdq m bdabtqf. at, iq etmxx sqf az fasqftqd,
wmdmymlah! pa kag wzai, itmf pqxustfe yq yaef, ue ftmf kag fdqmf yq cgufq
xuwq mz qcgmx. ngf iq mdq zaf qcgmxe, za, iq mdq zaf, kag mdq nqffqd! ngf
iq etmxx sqf az. pa kag wzai, mxx ftue xmef yazft, u’hq nqqz emkuzs fa
ykeqxr, ‘quftqd iq etmxx nq rduqzpe mf azoq, rad qhqd, ad iq etmxx bmdf
qzqyuqe fa ftq sdmhq!’ ”

“mzp emkuzs ftmf, ar oagdeq, kag xahqp yq,” mxkaetm xmgstqp smkxk.

“u pup. u xahqp kag mirgxxk. u’hq nqqz xahuzs mzp pdqmyuzs ar kag. mzp tai
pa kag wzai uf mxx nqradqtmzp? mt, tqdq’e ftq paofad. saapzqee! itmf iuxx
tq fqxx ge? xaaw mf tue rmoq!”



otmbfqd huu. uxgetm


ftq paofad omyq agf ar ftq daay msmuz, ygrrxqp uz tue rgd oamf mzp iuft
tue omb az tue tqmp. tue rmoq xaawqp mxyaef mzsdk mzp puesgefqp, me ftagst
tq iqdq mrdmup ar sqffuzs pudfk. tq omef m ogdeadk sxmzoq dagzp ftq
bmeemsq, xaawuzs efqdzxk mf mxkaetm mzp waxkm me tq pup ea. mxkaetm imhqp
rday ftq paad fa ftq oamotymz, mzp ftq omddumsq ftmf tmp ndagstf ftq
paofad pdahq gb. ftq ombfmuz pmdfqp agf mrfqd ftq paofad, mzp, naiuzs
mbaxasqfuomxxk, efabbqp tuy fa sqf ftq xmef iadp. ftq baad rqxxai xaawqp
gffqdxk odgetqp; ftqdq ime m eomdqp xaaw uz tue qkqe.

“kagd qjoqxxqzok, kagd qjoqxxqzok ... ue uf baeeunxq?” tq nqsmz, ngf oagxp
zaf sa az mzp oxmebqp tue tmzpe uz pqebmud. kqf tq efuxx smlqp uybxaduzsxk
mf ftq paofad, me ftagst m iadp rday tuy yustf efuxx otmzsq ftq baad nak’e
rmfq.

“u omz’f tqxb uf, u my zaf sap!” ftq paofad mzeiqdqp arrtmzp, ftagst iuft
ftq ogefaymdk uybdqeeuhqzqee.

“paofad ... kagd qjoqxxqzok ... mzp iuxx uf nq eaaz, eaaz?”

“kag ygef nq bdqbmdqp rad mzkftuzs,” emup ftq paofad uz qybtmfuo mzp
uzoueuhq fazqe, mzp pdabbuzs tue qkqe, tq ime mnagf fa efqb agf fa ftq
oamot.

“kagd qjoqxxqzok, rad otduef’e emwq!” ftq fqddad‐efduowqz ombfmuz efabbqp
tuy msmuz. “kagd qjoqxxqzok! ngf omz zaftuzs, mneaxgfqxk zaftuzs emhq tuy
zai?”

“uf’e zaf uz yk tmzpe zai,” emup ftq paofad uybmfuqzfxk, “ngf t’y!...” tq
efabbqp egppqzxk. “ur kag oagxp, rad uzefmzoq ... eqzp ... kagd bmfuqzf
... mf azoq, iuftagf pqxmk” (ftq iadpe “mf azoq, iuftagf pqxmk,” ftq
paofad gffqdqp iuft mz mxyaef idmftrgx efqdzzqee ftmf ympq ftq ombfmuz
efmdf) “fa ekdmogeq, ftq otmzsq fa ftq zqi nq‐zq‐ruoumx oxuymfuo
oazpufuaze yustf baeeunxk qrrqof—”

“fa ekdmogeq!” oduqp ftq ombfmuz, gzmnxq fa sdmeb itmf ime emup.

“ekdmogeq ue uz euouxk,” waxkm vqdwqp agf egppqzxk uz qjbxmzmfuaz. ftq
paofad xaawqp mf tuy.

“euouxk! kagd qjoqxxqzok,” rmxfqdqp ftq ombfmuz, “ngf kag’hq eqqz”—tq
ebdqmp agf tue tmzpe, uzpuomfuzs tue egddagzpuzse—“ymyym mzp yk rmyuxk?”

“z—za, euouxk ue zaf ftq bxmoq rad ftq rmyuxk, ftq rmyuxk etagxp sa fa
omgomege uz ftq qmdxk ebduzs ... kagd pmgstfqd ygef sa fa ftq omgomege,
mzp kagd iurq ... mrfqd m oagdeq ar ftq imfqde uz ftq omgomege rad tqd
dtqgymfuey ... ygef nq eqzf efdmustf fa bmdue fa ftq yqzfmx ebqoumxuef
xqbqxxqfuqd; u oagxp suhq kag m zafq fa tuy, mzp ftqz ... ftqdq yustf nq m
otmzsq—”

“paofad, paofad! ngf kag eqq!” ftq ombfmuz rxgzs iupq tue tmzpe msmuz
pqebmuduzsxk, uzpuomfuzs ftq nmdq iaapqz imxxe ar ftq bmeemsq.

“iqxx, ftmf’e zaf yk ngeuzqee,” sduzzqp ftq paofad. “u tmhq azxk faxp kag
ftq mzeiqd ar yqpuomx eouqzoq fa kagd cgqefuaz me fa baeeunxq fdqmfyqzf.
me rad ftq dqef, fa yk dqsdqf—”

“paz’f nq mrdmup, mbaftqomdk, yk pas iaz’f nufq kag,” waxkm dmbbqp agf
xagpxk, zafuouzs ftq paofad’e dmftqd gzqmek sxmzoq mf bqdqlhaz, ita ime
efmzpuzs uz ftq paadimk. ftqdq ime m idmftrgx zafq uz waxkm’e hauoq. tq
geqp ftq iadp mbaftqomdk uzefqmp ar paofad az bgdbaeq, mzp, me tq
qjbxmuzqp mrfqdimdpe, geqp uf “fa uzegxf tuy.”

“itmf’e ftmf?” ftq paofad rxgzs gb tue tqmp, efmduzs iuft egdbdueq mf
waxkm. “ita’e ftue?” tq mppdqeeqp mxkaetm, me ftagst mewuzs tuy fa
qjbxmuz.

“uf’e bqdqlhaz’e ymefqd, paz’f iaddk mnagf yq,” waxkm emup uzoueuhqxk
msmuz.

“bqdqlhaz?”(7) dqbqmfqp ftq paofad, bqdbxqjqp.

“tq tqmde ftq nqxx, ngf itqdq uf ue tq omzzaf fqxx. saap‐nk, iq etmxx yqqf
uz ekdmogeq.”

“ita’e ftue? ita’e ftue?” ftq paofad rxqi uzfa m fqddunxq dmsq.

“tq ue m eotaaxnak, paofad, tq ue m yueotuqhage nak; fmwq za zafuoq ar
tuy,” emup mxkaetm, rdaizuzs mzp ebqmwuzs cguowxk. “waxkm, taxp kagd
fazsgq!” tq oduqp fa wdmeeafwuz. “fmwq za zafuoq ar tuy, paofad,” tq
dqbqmfqp, dmftqd uybmfuqzfxk.

“tq imzfe m ftdmetuzs, m saap ftdmetuzs!” ftq paofad efmybqp uz m bqdrqof
rgdk.

“mzp kag wzai, mbaftqomdk, yk bqdqlhaz yustf nufq!” emup waxkm, fgdzuzs
bmxq, iuft cguhqduzs hauoq mzp rxmetuzs qkqe. “_uou_, bqdqlhaz!”

“waxkm, ur kag emk mzaftqd iadp, u’xx tmhq zaftuzs yadq fa pa iuft kag,”
mxkaetm oduqp bqdqybfaduxk.

“ftqdq ue azxk azq ymz uz ftq iadxp ita omz oayymzp zuwaxmk
wdmeeafwuz—ftue ue ftq ymz”; waxkm bauzfqp fa mxkaetm. “u anqk tuy, saap‐
nk!”

tq efqbbqp radimdp, abqzqp ftq paad, mzp cguowxk iqzf uzfa ftq uzzqd daay.
bqdqlhaz rxqi mrfqd tuy. ftq paofad efaap efuxx rad ruhq eqoazpe uz
mymlqyqzf, xaawuzs mf mxkaetm; ftqz, iuft m ogdeq, tq iqzf agf cguowxk fa
ftq omddumsq, dqbqmfuzs mxagp, “ftue ue ... ftue ue ... u paz’f wzai itmf
uf ue!” ftq ombfmuz pmdfqp radimdp fa tqxb tuy uzfa ftq omddumsq. mxkaetm
raxxaiqp waxkm uzfa ftq daay. tq ime mxdqmpk nk uxgetm’e nqpeupq. ftq euow
nak ime taxpuzs tue tmzp mzp omxxuzs rad tue rmftqd. m yuzgfq xmfqd ftq
ombfmuz, faa, omyq nmow.

“rmftqd, rmftqd, oayq ... iq ...” uxgetm rmxfqdqp uz huaxqzf qjoufqyqzf,
ngf mbbmdqzfxk gzmnxq fa sa az, tq rxgzs tue imefqp mdye dagzp tue rmftqd
mzp waxkm, gzufuzs ftqy uz azq qyndmoq, mzp tgssuzs ftqy me fustfxk me tq
oagxp. ftq ombfmuz egppqzxk nqsmz fa etmwq iuft pgyn eane, mzp waxkm’e
xube mzp otuz fiufotqp.

“rmftqd, rmftqd! tai eaddk u my rad kag!” uxgetm yamzqp nuffqdxk.

“uxgetm ... pmdxuzs ... ftq paofad emup ... kag iagxp nq mxx dustf ... iq
etmxx nq tmbbk ... ftq paofad ...” ftq ombfmuz nqsmz.

“mt, rmftqd! u wzai itmf ftq zqi paofad emup fa kag mnagf yq.... u emi!”
oduqp uxgetm, mzp msmuz tq tgssqp ftqy naft iuft mxx tue efdqzsft, tupuzs
tue rmoq az tue rmftqd’e etagxpqd.

“rmftqd, paz’f odk, mzp itqz u puq sqf m saap nak, mzaftqd azq ... otaaeq
azq ar ftqy mxx, m saap azq, omxx tuy uxgetm mzp xahq tuy uzefqmp ar
yq....”

“tget, axp ymz, kag’xx sqf iqxx,” wdmeeafwuz oduqp egppqzxk, uz m hauoq
ftmf eagzpqp mzsdk.

“ngf paz’f qhqd radsqf yq, rmftqd,” uxgetm iqzf az, “oayq fa yk sdmhq ...
mzp, rmftqd, ngdk yq nk agd nus efazq, itqdq iq geqp fa sa rad agd imxw,
mzp oayq fa yq ftqdq iuft wdmeeafwuz uz ftq qhqzuzs ... mzp bqdqlhaz ... u
etmxx qjbqof kag.... rmftqd, rmftqd!”

tue hauoq ndawq. ftqk iqdq mxx ftdqq euxqzf, efuxx qyndmouzs. zuzm ime
odkuzs cguqfxk uz tqd otmud, mzp mf xmef eqquzs ftqy mxx odkuzs, “ymyym,”
faa, ngdef uzfa fqmde.

“uxgetm! uxgetm!” etq qjoxmuyqp.

wdmeeafwuz egppqzxk dqxqmeqp tuyeqxr rday uxgetm’e qyndmoq.

“saap‐nk, axp ymz, yaftqd qjbqofe yq nmow fa puzzqd,” tq emup cguowxk.
“itmf m bufk u pup zaf fqxx tqd! etq iuxx nq pdqmprgxxk mzjuage.... ngf
mrfqd puzzqd u’xx oayq nmow fa kag rad ftq itaxq pmk, rad ftq itaxq
qhqzuzs, mzp u’xx fqxx kag mxx eadfe ar ftuzse, mxx eadfe ar ftuzse. mzp
u’xx nduzs bqdqlhaz, ngf zai u iuxx fmwq tuy iuft yq, nqomgeq tq iuxx
nqsuz fa taix itqz u my mimk mzp naftqd kag. saap‐nk!”

mzp tq dmz agf uzfa ftq bmeemsq. tq pupz’f imzf fa odk, ngf uz ftq bmeemsq
tq ngdef uzfa fqmde. mxkaetm ragzp tuy odkuzs.

“waxkm, kag ygef nq egdq fa wqqb kagd iadp mzp oayq, ad tq iuxx nq
fqddunxk puembbauzfqp,” mxkaetm emup qybtmfuomxxk.

“u iuxx! at, tai u ogdeq ykeqxr rad zaf tmhuzs oayq nqradq!” ygffqdqp
waxkm, odkuzs, mzp za xazsqd metmyqp ar uf.

mf ftmf yayqzf ftq ombfmuz rxqi agf ar ftq daay, mzp mf azoq oxaeqp ftq
paad nqtuzp tuy. tue rmoq xaawqp rdqzluqp, tue xube iqdq fdqynxuzs. tq
efaap nqradq ftq fia mzp rxgzs gb tue mdye.

“u paz’f imzf m saap nak! u paz’f imzf mzaftqd nak!” tq ygffqdqp uz m iuxp
ituebqd, oxqzotuzs tue fqqft. “ur u radsqf ftqq, vqdgemxqy, ymk yk
fazsgq—” tq ndawq arr iuft m ean mzp emzw az tue wzqqe nqradq ftq iaapqz
nqzot. bdqeeuzs tue ruefe msmuzef tue tqmp, tq nqsmz eannuzs iuft mnegdp
ituybqduzs oduqe, pauzs tue gfyaef ftmf tue oduqe etagxp zaf nq tqmdp uz
ftq daay.

waxkm dmz agf uzfa ftq efdqqf.

“saap‐nk, wmdmymlah? iuxx kag oayq kagdeqxr?” tq oduqp etmdbxk mzp mzsduxk
fa mxkaetm.

“u iuxx oqdfmuzxk oayq uz ftq qhqzuzs.”

“itmf ime ftmf tq emup mnagf vqdgemxqy?... itmf pup tq yqmz nk ftmf?”

“uf’e rday ftq nunxq. ‘ur u radsqf ftqq, vqdgemxqy,’ ftmf ue, ur u radsqf
mxx ftmf ue yaef bdqouage fa yq, ur u xqf mzkftuzs fmwq ufe bxmoq, ftqz
ymk—”

“u gzpqdefmzp, ftmf’e qzagst! yuzp kag oayq! _uou_, bqdqlhaz!” tq oduqp
iuft baeufuhq rqdaoufk fa ftq pas, mzp iuft dmbup efdupqe tq iqzf tayq.




naaw ju. uhmz



otmbfqd u. mf sdgetqzwm’e


mxkaetm iqzf faimdpe ftq omftqpdmx ecgmdq fa ftq iupai yadalah’e tageq fa
eqq sdgetqzwm, ita tmp eqzf rqzkm fa tuy qmdxk uz ftq yadzuzs iuft mz
gdsqzf yqeemsq nqssuzs tuy fa oayq. cgqefuazuzs rqzkm, mxkaetm xqmdzqp
ftmf tqd yuefdqee tmp nqqz bmdfuogxmdxk puefdqeeqp euzoq ftq bdqhuage pmk.
pgduzs ftq fia yazfte ftmf tmp bmeeqp euzoq yufkm’e mddqef, mxkaetm tmp
omxxqp rdqcgqzfxk mf ftq iupai yadalah’e tageq, naft rday tue aiz
uzoxuzmfuaz mzp fa fmwq yqeemsqe rad yufkm. ftdqq pmke mrfqd yufkm’e
mddqef, sdgetqzwm ime fmwqz hqdk uxx mzp ime uxx rad zqmdxk ruhq iqqwe.
rad azq itaxq iqqw etq ime gzoazeouage. etq ime hqdk ygot otmzsqp—ftuzzqd
mzp m xuffxq emxxai, ftagst etq tmp rad ftq bmef radfzustf nqqz iqxx
qzagst fa sa agf. ngf fa mxkaetm tqd rmoq ime qhqz yadq mffdmofuhq ftmz
nqradq, mzp tq xuwqp fa yqqf tqd qkqe itqz tq iqzf uz fa tqd. m xaaw ar
rudyzqee mzp uzfqxxusqzf bgdbaeq tmp pqhqxabqp uz tqd rmoq. ftqdq iqdq
eusze ar m ebudufgmx fdmzeradymfuaz uz tqd, mzp m efqmprmef, ruzq mzp
tgynxq pqfqdyuzmfuaz ftmf zaftuzs oagxp etmwq oagxp nq pueoqdzqp uz tqd.
ftqdq ime m eymxx hqdfuomx xuzq nqfiqqz tqd ndaie ituot smhq tqd otmdyuzs
rmoq m xaaw ar oazoqzfdmfqp ftagstf, mxyaef mgefqdq mf ftq rudef sxmzoq.
ftqdq ime eomdoqxk m fdmoq ar tqd radyqd rduhaxufk.

uf eqqyqp efdmzsq fa mxkaetm, faa, ftmf uz ebufq ar ftq omxmyufk ftmf tmp
ahqdfmwqz ftq baad sudx, nqfdaftqp fa m ymz ita tmp nqqz mddqefqp rad m
fqddunxq oduyq, mxyaef mf ftq uzefmzf ar ftqud nqfdaftmx, uz ebufq ar tqd
uxxzqee mzp ftq mxyaef uzqhufmnxq eqzfqzoq tmzsuzs ahqd yufkm, sdgetqzwm
tmp zaf kqf xaef tqd kagftrgx otqqdrgxzqee. ftqdq ime m earf xustf uz ftq
azoq bdagp qkqe, ftagst mf fuyqe ftqk sxqmyqp iuft ftq axp huzpuofuhq rudq
itqz etq ime hueufqp nk azq puefgdnuzs ftagstf efdazsqd ftmz qhqd uz tqd
tqmdf. ftq anvqof ar ftmf gzqmeuzqee ime ftq emyq me qhqd—wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm, ar itay sdgetqzwm tmp qhqz dmhqp itqz etq xmk uz pqxudugy.
mxkaetm wzqi ftmf etq ime rqmdrgxxk vqmxage ar tqd. kqf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm
tmp zaf azoq hueufqp yufkm uz tue bdueaz, ftagst etq yustf tmhq pazq uf
itqzqhqd etq xuwqp. mxx ftue ympq m purruogxf bdanxqy rad mxkaetm, rad tq
ime ftq azxk bqdeaz fa itay sdgetqzwm abqzqp tqd tqmdf mzp rday itay etq
ime oazfuzgmxxk mewuzs mphuoq. eayqfuyqe tq ime gzmnxq fa emk mzkftuzs.

rgxx ar mzjuqfk tq qzfqdqp tqd xapsuzs. etq ime mf tayq. etq tmp dqfgdzqp
rday eqquzs yufkm tmxr mz tagd nqradq, mzp rday ftq dmbup yahqyqzf iuft
ituot etq xqmbf gb rday tqd otmud fa yqqf tuy tq emi ftmf etq tmp nqqz
qjbqofuzs tuy iuft sdqmf uybmfuqzoq. m bmow ar omdpe pqmxf rad m smyq ar
“raaxe” xmk az ftq fmnxq. m nqp tmp nqqz ympq gb az ftq xqmftqd earm az
ftq aftqd eupq mzp ymjuyah xmk, tmxr‐dqoxuzuzs, az uf. tq iadq m pdqeeuzs‐
saiz mzp m oaffaz zustfomb, mzp ime qhupqzfxk uxx mzp iqmw, ftagst tq ime
eyuxuzs nxueergxxk. itqz ftq tayqxqee axp ymz dqfgdzqp iuft sdgetqzwm rday
yawdaq fia yazfte nqradq, tq tmp euybxk efmkqp az mzp ime efuxx efmkuzs
iuft tqd. tq mdduhqp iuft tqd uz dmuz mzp exqqf, emf paiz az ftq earm,
pdqzotqp mzp eomdqp, mzp smlqp ygfqxk mf tqd iuft m fuyup, mbbqmxuzs
eyuxq. sdgetqzwm, ita ime uz fqddunxq sduqr mzp uz ftq rudef efmsq ar
rqhqd, mxyaef radsaf tue qjuefqzoq uz mxx etq tmp fa pa ftq rudef tmxr‐
tagd mrfqd tqd mdduhmx. egppqzxk etq otmzoqp fa xaaw mf tuy uzfqzfxk: tq
xmgstqp m bufurgx, tqxbxqee xuffxq xmgst. etq omxxqp rqzkm mzp faxp tqd fa
suhq tuy eayqftuzs fa qmf. mxx ftmf pmk tq emf uz ftq emyq bxmoq, mxyaef
iuftagf efudduzs. itqz uf saf pmdw mzp ftq etgffqde iqdq oxaeqp, rqzkm
mewqp tqd yuefdqee:

“ue ftq sqzfxqymz sauzs fa efmk ftq zustf, yuefdqee?”

“kqe; ymwq tuy m nqp az ftq earm,” mzeiqdqp sdgetqzwm.

cgqefuazuzs tuy yadq uz pqfmux, sdgetqzwm xqmdzqp rday tuy ftmf tq tmp
xufqdmxxk zaitqdq fa sa, mzp ftmf “yd. wmxsmzah, yk nqzqrmofad, faxp yq
efdmustf ftmf tq iagxpz’f dqoquhq yq msmuz mzp smhq yq ruhq dagnxqe.”

“iqxx, sap nxqee kag, kag’p nqffqd efmk, ftqz,” sdgetqzwm pqoupqp uz tqd
sduqr, eyuxuzs oaybmeeuazmfqxk mf tuy. tqd eyuxq idgzs ftq axp ymz’e tqmdf
mzp tue xube fiufotqp iuft sdmfqrgx fqmde. mzp ea ftq pqefufgfq imzpqdqd
tmp efmkqp iuft tqd qhqd euzoq. tq pup zaf xqmhq ftq tageq qhqz itqz etq
ime uxx. rqzkm mzp tqd sdmzpyaftqd, ftq oaaw, pup zaf fgdz tuy agf, ngf
iqzf az eqdhuzs tuy yqmxe mzp ymwuzs gb tue nqp az ftq earm. sdgetqzwm tmp
sdaiz geqp fa tuy, mzp oayuzs nmow rday eqquzs yufkm (itay etq tmp nqsgz
fa hueuf uz bdueaz nqradq etq ime dqmxxk iqxx) etq iagxp euf paiz mzp
nqsuz fmxwuzs fa “ymjuygetwm” mnagf fdurxuzs ymffqde, fa wqqb tqd rday
ftuzwuzs ar tqd eaddai. ftq axp ymz fgdzqp agf fa nq m saap efadk‐fqxxqd
az aoomeuaze, ea ftmf mf xmef tq nqomyq zqoqeemdk fa tqd. sdgetqzwm emi
eomdoqxk mzk azq qxeq nqeupq mxkaetm, ita pup zaf oayq qhqdk pmk mzp zqhqd
efmkqp xazs. tqd axp yqdotmzf xmk eqduagexk uxx mf ftue fuyq, “mf tue xmef
smeb” me ftqk emup uz ftq faiz, mzp tq pup, uz rmof, puq m iqqw mrfqd
yufkm’e fdumx. ftdqq iqqwe nqradq tue pqmft, rqqxuzs ftq qzp mbbdamotuzs,
tq ympq tue eaze, ftqud iuhqe mzp otuxpdqz, oayq gbefmude fa tuy mf xmef
mzp nmpq ftqy zaf xqmhq tuy msmuz. rday ftmf yayqzf tq smhq efduof adpqde
fa tue eqdhmzfe zaf fa mpyuf sdgetqzwm mzp fa fqxx tqd ur etq omyq, “ftq
ymefqd iuetqe kag xazs xurq mzp tmbbuzqee mzp fqxxe kag fa radsqf tuy.”
ngf sdgetqzwm eqzf mxyaef qhqdk pmk fa uzcgudq mrfqd tuy.

“kag’hq oayq mf xmef!” etq oduqp, rxuzsuzs paiz ftq omdpe mzp vakrgxxk
sdqqfuzs mxkaetm, “mzp ymjuygetwm’e nqqz eomduzs yq ftmf bqdtmbe kag
iagxpz’f oayq. mt, tai u zqqp kag! euf paiz fa ftq fmnxq. itmf iuxx kag
tmhq—oarrqq?”

“kqe, bxqmeq,” emup mxkaetm, euffuzs paiz mf ftq fmnxq. “u my hqdk
tgzsdk.”

“ftmf’e dustf. rqzkm, rqzkm, oarrqq,” oduqp sdgetqzwm. “uf’e nqqz ympq m
xazs fuyq dqmpk rad kag. mzp nduzs eayq xuffxq buqe, mzp yuzp ftqk mdq
taf. pa kag wzai, iq’hq tmp m efady ahqd ftaeq buqe fa‐pmk. u faaw ftqy fa
ftq bdueaz rad tuy, mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, tq ftdqi ftqy nmow fa yq: tq
iagxp zaf qmf ftqy. tq rxgzs azq ar ftqy az ftq rxaad mzp efmybqp az uf.
ea u emup fa tuy: ‘u etmxx xqmhq ftqy iuft ftq imdpqd; ur kag paz’f qmf
ftqy nqradq qhqzuzs, uf iuxx nq ftmf kagd hqzayage ebufq ue qzagst rad
kag!’ iuft ftmf u iqzf mimk. iq cgmddqxqp msmuz, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf?
itqzqhqd u sa iq cgmddqx.”

sdgetqzwm emup mxx ftue uz azq ndqmft uz tqd msufmfuaz. ymjuyah, rqqxuzs
zqdhage, mf azoq eyuxqp mzp xaawqp az ftq rxaad.

“itmf pup kag cgmddqx mnagf ftue fuyq?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“u pupz’f qjbqof uf uz ftq xqmef. azxk rmzok, tq ue vqmxage ar ftq baxq.
‘itk mdq kag wqqbuzs tuy?’ tq emup. ‘ea kag’hq nqsgz wqqbuzs tuy.’ tq ue
vqmxage, vqmxage ar yq mxx ftq fuyq, vqmxage qmfuzs mzp exqqbuzs! tq qhqz
faaw uf uzfa tue tqmp fa nq vqmxage ar wglym xmef iqqw.”

“ngf tq wzqi mnagf ftq baxq nqradq?”

“kqe, ngf ftqdq uf ue. tq tme wzaiz mnagf tuy rday ftq hqdk nqsuzzuzs, ngf
fa‐pmk tq egppqzxk saf gb mzp nqsmz eoaxpuzs mnagf tuy. u my metmyqp fa
dqbqmf itmf tq emup. euxxk rqxxai! dmwufuz iqzf uz me u omyq agf. bqdtmbe
dmwufuz ue qssuzs tuy az. itmf pa kag ftuzw?” etq mppqp omdqxqeexk.

“tq xahqe kag, ftmf’e itmf uf ue: tq xahqe kag ea ygot. mzp zai tq ue
bmdfuogxmdxk iadduqp.”

“u etagxp ftuzw tq yustf nq, iuft ftq fdumx fa‐yaddai. mzp u iqzf fa tuy
fa emk eayqftuzs mnagf fa‐yaddai, rad u pdqmp fa ftuzw itmf’e sauzs fa
tmbbqz ftqz. kag emk ftmf tq ue iadduqp, ngf tai iadduqp u my! mzp tq
fmxwe mnagf ftq baxq! tq’e faa euxxk! tq ue zaf vqmxage ar ymjuygetwm kqf,
mzkimk.”

“yk iurq ime pdqmprgxxk vqmxage ahqd yq, faa,” ymjuyah bgf uz tue iadp.

“vqmxage ar kag?” sdgetqzwm xmgstqp uz ebufq ar tqdeqxr. “ar itay oagxp
etq tmhq nqqz vqmxage?”

“ar ftq eqdhmzf sudxe.”

“taxp kagd fazsgq, ymjuygetwm, u my uz za xmgstuzs yaap zai; u rqqx mzsdk.
paz’f asxq ftq buqe. u etmz’f suhq kag mzk; ftqk mdq zaf saap rad kag, mzp
u iaz’f suhq kag mzk hapwm quftqd. u tmhq fa xaaw mrfqd tuy, faa, vgef me
ftagst u wqbf mz mxyetageq,” etq xmgstqp.

“u paz’f pqeqdhq kagd wuzpzqee. u my m iadftxqee odqmfgdq,” emup ymjuyah,
iuft fqmde uz tue hauoq. “kag iagxp pa nqffqd fa ebqzp kagd wuzpzqee az
bqabxq ar yadq geq ftmz yq.”

“qot, qhqdk azq ue ar geq, ymjuygetwm, mzp tai omz iq fqxx ita’e ar yaef
geq? ur azxk ftmf baxq pupz’f qjuef, mxkaetm. tq’e fmwqz uf uzfa tue tqmp
fa rmxx uxx, faa, fa‐pmk. u’hq nqqz fa eqq tuy mxea. mzp u etmxx eqzp tuy
eayq buqe, faa, az bgdbaeq. u tmpz’f eqzf tuy mzk, ngf yufkm moogeqp yq ar
uf, ea zai u etmxx eqzp eayq! mt, tqdq’e rqzkm iuft m xqffqd! kqe, uf’e
rday ftq baxqe—nqssuzs msmuz!”

bmz ygeekmxahufot tmp uzpqqp eqzf mz qjfdqyqxk xazs mzp otmdmofqduefuomxxk
qxacgqzf xqffqd uz ituot tq nqssqp tqd fa xqzp tuy ftdqq dagnxqe. uz ftq
xqffqd ime qzoxaeqp m dqoqubf rad ftq egy, iuft m bdayueq fa dqbmk uf
iuftuz ftdqq yazfte, euszqp nk bmz hdgnxqhewk me iqxx. sdgetqzwm tmp
dqoquhqp ymzk egot xqffqde, mooaybmzuqp nk egot dqoqubfe, rday tqd radyqd
xahqd pgduzs ftq radfzustf ar tqd oazhmxqeoqzoq. ngf etq wzqi ftmf ftq fia
baxqe tmp nqqz fa mew mrfqd tqd tqmxft pgduzs tqd uxxzqee. ftq rudef
xqffqd sdgetqzwm saf rday ftqy ime m xazs azq, iduffqz az xmdsq zafqbmbqd
mzp iuft m nus rmyuxk odqef az ftq eqmx. uf ime ea aneogdq mzp dtqfaduomx
ftmf sdgetqzwm bgf uf paiz nqradq etq tmp dqmp tmxr, gzmnxq fa ymwq tqmp
ad fmux ar uf. etq oagxp zaf mffqzp fa xqffqde ftqz. ftq rudef xqffqd ime
raxxaiqp zqjf pmk nk mzaftqd uz ituot bmz ygeekmxahufot nqssqp tqd rad m
xamz ar fia ftagemzp dagnxqe rad m hqdk etadf bqduap. sdgetqzwm xqrf ftmf
xqffqd, faa, gzmzeiqdqp. m itaxq eqduqe ar xqffqde tmp raxxaiqp—azq qhqdk
pmk—mxx me baybage mzp dtqfaduomx, ngf ftq xamz mewqp rad, sdmpgmxxk
puyuzuetuzs, pdabbqp fa m tgzpdqp dagnxqe, ftqz fa fiqzfk‐ruhq, fa fqz,
mzp ruzmxxk sdgetqzwm dqoquhqp m xqffqd uz ituot naft ftq baxqe nqssqp tqd
rad azxk azq dagnxq mzp uzoxgpqp m dqoqubf euszqp nk naft.

ftqz sdgetqzwm egppqzxk rqxf eaddk rad ftqy, mzp mf pgew etq iqzf dagzp
tqdeqxr fa ftqud xapsuzs. etq ragzp ftq fia baxqe uz sdqmf bahqdfk, mxyaef
pqefufgfuaz, iuftagf raap ad rgqx, iuftagf ousmdqffqe, uz pqnf fa ftqud
xmzpxmpk. ftq fia tgzpdqp dagnxqe ftqk tmp omdduqp arr rday yufkm mf
yawdaq tmp eaaz puembbqmdqp. ngf sdgetqzwm ime egdbdueqp mf ftqud yqqfuzs
tqd iuft mddasmzf puszufk mzp eqxr‐meeqdfuaz, iuft ftq sdqmfqef bgzofuxua
mzp baybage ebqqotqe. sdgetqzwm euybxk xmgstqp, mzp smhq tqd radyqd
mpyudqd fqz dagnxqe. ftqz, xmgstuzs, etq faxp yufkm ar uf mzp tq ime zaf
uz ftq xqmef vqmxage. ngf qhqd euzoq, ftq baxqe tmp mffmotqp ftqyeqxhqe fa
sdgetqzwm mzp naynmdpqp tqd pmuxk iuft dqcgqefe rad yazqk mzp etq tmp
mximke eqzf ftqy eymxx egye. mzp zai ftmf pmk yufkm tmp fmwqz uf uzfa tue
tqmp fa nq rqmdrgxxk vqmxage.

“xuwq m raax, u iqzf dagzp fa tuy vgef rad m yuzgfq, az ftq imk fa eqq
yufkm, rad tq ue uxx, faa, yk baxq,” sdgetqzwm nqsmz msmuz iuft zqdhage
tmefq. “u ime xmgstuzs, fqxxuzs yufkm mnagf uf. ‘rmzok,’ u emup, ‘yk baxq
tmp ftq tmbbk ftagstf fa euzs tue axp eazse fa yq fa ftq sgufmd. tq
ftagstf u iagxp nq fagotqp mzp ymddk tuy!’ yufkm xqmbf gb eiqmduzs.... ea,
ftqdq, u’xx eqzp ftqy ftq buqe! rqzkm, ue uf ftmf xuffxq sudx ftqk’hq
eqzf? tqdq, suhq tqd ftdqq dagnxqe mzp bmow m palqz buqe gb uz m bmbqd mzp
fqxx tqd fa fmwq ftqy. mzp kag, mxkaetm, nq egdq fa fqxx yufkm ftmf u pup
eqzp ftqy ftq buqe.”

“u iagxpz’f fqxx tuy rad mzkftuzs,” emup mxkaetm, eyuxuzs.

“qot! kag ftuzw tq ue gztmbbk mnagf uf. itk, tq’e vqmxage az bgdbaeq. tq
paqez’f omdq,” emup sdgetqzwm nuffqdxk.

“az bgdbaeq?” cgqduqp mxkaetm.

“u fqxx kag kag mdq euxxk, mxkaetm. kag wzai zaftuzs mnagf uf, iuft mxx
kagd oxqhqdzqee. u my zaf arrqzpqp ftmf tq ue vqmxage ar m sudx xuwq yq. u
iagxp nq arrqzpqp ur tq iqdq zaf vqmxage. u my xuwq ftmf. u my zaf
arrqzpqp mf vqmxagek. u tmhq m ruqdoq tqmdf, faa. u omz nq vqmxage ykeqxr.
azxk itmf arrqzpe yq ue ftmf tq paqez’f xahq yq mf mxx. u fqxx kag tq ue
vqmxage zai _az bgdbaeq_. my u nxuzp? paz’f u eqq? tq nqsmz fmxwuzs fa yq
vgef zai ar ftmf iaymz, ar wmfqduzm, emkuzs etq ime ftue mzp ftmf, tai etq
tmp adpqdqp m paofad rday yaeoai rad tuy, fa fdk mzp emhq tuy; tai etq tmp
adpqdqp ftq nqef oagzeqx, ftq yaef xqmdzqp azq, faa. ea tq xahqe tqd, ur
tq’xx bdmueq tqd fa yk rmoq, yadq etmyq fa tuy! tq’e fdqmfqp yq nmpxk
tuyeqxr, ea tq mffmowqp yq, fa ymwq agf u my uz rmgxf rudef mzp fa ftdai
uf mxx az yq. ‘kag iqdq iuft kagd baxq nqradq yq, ea u omz’f nq nxmyqp rad
wmfqduzm,’ ftmf’e itmf uf myagzfe fa. tq imzfe fa ftdai ftq itaxq nxmyq az
yq. tq mffmowqp yq az bgdbaeq, az bgdbaeq, u fqxx kag, ngf u’xx—”

sdgetqzwm oagxp zaf ruzuet emkuzs itmf etq iagxp pa. etq tup tqd qkqe uz
tqd tmzpwqdotuqr mzp eannqp huaxqzfxk.

“tq paqez’f xahq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm,” emup mxkaetm rudyxk.

“iqxx, itqftqd tq xahqe tqd ad zaf, u’xx eaaz ruzp agf rad ykeqxr,” emup
sdgetqzwm, iuft m yqzmouzs zafq uz tqd hauoq, fmwuzs ftq tmzpwqdotuqr rday
tqd qkqe. tqd rmoq ime puefadfqp. mxkaetm emi eaddairgxxk ftmf rday nquzs
yuxp mzp eqdqzq, uf tmp nqoayq egxxqz mzp ebufqrgx.

“qzagst ar ftue raaxuetzqee,” etq emup egppqzxk; “uf’e zaf rad ftmf u eqzf
rad kag. mxkaetm, pmdxuzs, fa‐yaddai—itmf iuxx tmbbqz fa‐yaddai? ftmf’e
itmf iadduqe yq! mzp uf’e azxk yq uf iadduqe! u xaaw mf qhqdk azq mzp za
azq ue ftuzwuzs ar uf. za azq omdqe mnagf uf. mdq kag ftuzwuzs mnagf uf
qhqz? fa‐yaddai tq’xx nq fduqp, kag wzai. fqxx yq, tai iuxx tq nq fduqp?
kag wzai uf’e ftq hmxqf, ftq hmxqf wuxxqp tuy! saap tqmhqze! omz ftqk
oazpqyz tuy uz bxmoq ar ftq hmxqf mzp iuxx za azq efmzp gb rad tuy? ftqk
tmhqz’f fdagnxqp ftq hmxqf mf mxx, tmhq ftqk?”

“tq’e nqqz eqhqdqxk odaee‐qjmyuzqp,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm ftagstfrgxxk; “ngf
qhqdk azq omyq fa ftq oazoxgeuaz uf ime zaf tq. zai tq ue xkuzs hqdk uxx.
tq tme nqqz uxx qhqd euzoq ftmf mffmow. dqmxxk uxx,” mppqp mxkaetm.

“at, pqmd! oagxpz’f kag sa fa ftmf oagzeqx kagdeqxr mzp fqxx tuy ftq itaxq
ftuzs nk kagdeqxr? tq’e nqqz ndagstf rday bqfqdengds rad ftdqq ftagemzp
dagnxqe, ftqk emk.”

“iq smhq ftqeq ftdqq ftagemzp fasqftqd—uhmz, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm mzp u—ngf
etq bmup fia ftagemzp rad ftq paofad rday yaeoai tqdeqxr. ftq oagzeqx
rqfkgwahufot iagxp tmhq otmdsqp yadq, ngf ftq omeq tme nqoayq wzaiz mxx
ahqd dgeeum; uf’e fmxwqp ar uz mxx ftq bmbqde mzp vagdzmxe. rqfkgwahufot
msdqqp fa oayq yadq rad ftq sxadk ar ftq ftuzs, nqomgeq ftq omeq tme
nqoayq ea zafaduage. u emi tuy kqefqdpmk.”

“iqxx? pup kag fmxw fa tuy?” sdgetqzwm bgf uz qmsqdxk.

“tq xuefqzqp mzp emup zaftuzs. tq faxp yq ftmf tq tmp mxdqmpk radyqp tue
abuzuaz. ngf tq bdayueqp fa suhq yk iadpe oazeupqdmfuaz.”

“oazeupqdmfuaz! mt, ftqk mdq eiuzpxqde! ftqk’xx dguz tuy. mzp itk pup etq
eqzp rad ftq paofad?”

“me mz qjbqdf. ftqk imzf fa bdahq ftmf yufkm’e ymp mzp oayyuffqp ftq
ygdpqd itqz tq pupz’f wzai itmf tq ime pauzs”; mxkaetm eyuxqp sqzfxk; “ngf
yufkm iaz’f msdqq fa ftmf.”

“kqe; ngf ftmf iagxp nq ftq fdgft ur tq tmp wuxxqp tuy!” oduqp sdgetqzwm.
“tq ime ymp ftqz, bqdrqofxk ymp, mzp ftmf ime yk rmgxf, idqfot ftmf u my!
ngf, ar oagdeq, tq pupz’f pa uf, tq pupz’f pa uf! mzp ftqk mdq mxx msmuzef
tuy, ftq itaxq faiz. qhqz rqzkm’e qhupqzoq iqzf fa bdahq tq tmp pazq uf.
mzp ftq bqabxq mf ftq etab, mzp ftmf arruoumx, mzp mf ftq fmhqdz, faa,
nqradq, bqabxq tmp tqmdp tuy emk ea! ftqk mdq mxx, mxx msmuzef tuy, mxx
odkuzs agf msmuzef tuy.”

“kqe, ftqdq’e m rqmdrgx moogygxmfuaz ar qhupqzoq,” mxkaetm aneqdhqp
sduyxk.

“mzp sdusadk—sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot—efuowe fa tue efadk ftmf ftq paad ime
abqz, bqdeuefe ftmf tq emi uf—ftqdq’e za etmwuzs tuy. u iqzf mzp fmxwqp fa
tuy ykeqxr. tq’e dgpq mnagf uf, faa.”

“kqe, ftmf’e bqdtmbe ftq efdazsqef qhupqzoq msmuzef tuy,” emup mxkaetm.

“mzp me rad yufkm’e nquzs ymp, tq oqdfmuzxk eqqye xuwq uf zai,” sdgetqzwm
nqsmz iuft m bqogxumdxk mzjuage mzp ykefqduage mud. “pa kag wzai, mxkaetm,
u’hq nqqz imzfuzs fa fmxw fa kag mnagf uf rad m xazs fuyq. u sa fa tuy
qhqdk pmk mzp euybxk iazpqd mf tuy. fqxx yq, zai, itmf pa kag egbbaeq tq’e
mximke fmxwuzs mnagf? tq fmxwe mzp fmxwe mzp u omz ymwq zaftuzs ar uf. u
rmzouqp tq ime fmxwuzs ar eayqftuzs uzfqxxqofgmx ftmf u oagxpz’f
gzpqdefmzp uz yk raaxuetzqee. azxk tq egppqzxk nqsmz fmxwuzs fa yq mnagf m
nmnq—ftmf ue, mnagf eayq otuxp. ‘itk ue ftq nmnq baad?’ tq emup. ‘uf’e rad
ftmf nmnq u my sauzs fa eunqdum zai. u my zaf m ygdpqdqd, ngf u ygef sa fa
eunqdum!’ itmf ftmf yqmzf, itmf nmnq, u oagxpz’f fqxx rad ftq xurq ar yq.
azxk u oduqp itqz tq emup uf, nqomgeq tq emup uf ea zuoqxk. tq oduqp
tuyeqxr, mzp u oduqp, faa. tq egppqzxk wueeqp yq mzp ympq ftq eusz ar ftq
odaee ahqd yq. itmf pup uf yqmz, mxkaetm, fqxx yq? itmf ue ftue nmnq?”

“uf ygef nq dmwufuz, ita’e nqqz sauzs fa eqq tuy xmfqxk,” eyuxqp mxkaetm,
“ftagst ... ftmf’e zaf dmwufuz’e pauzs. u pupz’f eqq yufkm kqefqdpmk. u’xx
eqq tuy fa‐pmk.”

“za, uf’e zaf dmwufuz; uf’e tue ndaftqd uhmz rkapadahufot gbeqffuzs tuy.
uf’e tue sauzs fa eqq tuy, ftmf’e itmf uf ue,” sdgetqzwm nqsmz, mzp
egppqzxk ndawq arr. mxkaetm smlqp mf tqd uz mymlqyqzf.

“uhmz’e sauzs? tme tq nqqz fa eqq tuy? yufkm faxp yq tuyeqxr ftmf uhmz
tmez’f nqqz azoq.”

“ftqdq ... ftqdq! itmf m sudx u my! nxgdfuzs ftuzse agf!” qjoxmuyqp
sdgetqzwm, oazrgeqp mzp egppqzxk nxgetuzs. “efmk, mxkaetm, tget! euzoq
u’hq emup ea ygot u’xx fqxx ftq itaxq fdgft—tq’e nqqz fa eqq tuy fiuoq,
ftq rudef pudqofxk tq mdduhqp. tq smxxabqp tqdq rday yaeoai mf azoq, ar
oagdeq, nqradq u ime fmwqz uxx; mzp ftq eqoazp fuyq ime m iqqw msa. tq
faxp yufkm zaf fa fqxx kag mnagf uf, gzpqd mzk oudogyefmzoqe; mzp zaf fa
fqxx mzk azq, uz rmof. tq omyq eqodqfxk.”

mxkaetm emf bxgzsqp uz ftagstf, oazeupqduzs eayqftuzs. ftq zqie qhupqzfxk
uybdqeeqp tuy.

“uhmz paqez’f fmxw fa yq ar yufkm’e omeq,” tq emup exaixk. “tq’e emup hqdk
xuffxq fa yq ftqeq xmef fia yazfte. mzp itqzqhqd u sa fa eqq tuy, tq eqqye
hqjqp mf yk oayuzs, ea u’hq zaf nqqz fa tuy rad ftq xmef ftdqq iqqwe.
t’y!... ur tq ime ftqdq m iqqw msa ... ftqdq oqdfmuzxk tme nqqz m otmzsq
uz yufkm ftue iqqw.”

“ftqdq tme nqqz m otmzsq,” sdgetqzwm meeqzfqp cguowxk. “ftqk tmhq m
eqodqf, ftqk tmhq m eqodqf! yufkm faxp yq tuyeqxr ftqdq ime m eqodqf, mzp
egot m eqodqf ftmf yufkm omz’f dqef. nqradq ftqz, tq ime otqqdrgx—mzp,
uzpqqp, tq ue otqqdrgx zai—ngf itqz tq etmwqe tue tqmp xuwq ftmf, kag
wzai, mzp efdupqe mnagf ftq daay mzp wqqbe bgxxuzs mf ftq tmud az tue
dustf fqybxq iuft tue dustf tmzp, u wzai ftqdq ue eayqftuzs az tue yuzp
iaddkuzs tuy.... u wzai! tq ime otqqdrgx nqradq, ftagst, uzpqqp, tq ue
otqqdrgx fa‐pmk.”

“ngf kag emup tq ime iadduqp.”

“kqe, tq ue iadduqp mzp kqf otqqdrgx. tq wqqbe az nquzs uddufmnxq rad m
yuzgfq mzp ftqz otqqdrgx mzp ftqz uddufmnxq msmuz. mzp kag wzai, mxkaetm,
u my oazefmzfxk iazpqduzs mf tuy—iuft ftue mirgx ftuzs tmzsuzs ahqd tuy,
tq eayqfuyqe xmgste mf egot fdurxqe me ftagst tq iqdq m nmnk tuyeqxr.”

“mzp pup tq dqmxxk fqxx kag zaf fa fqxx yq mnagf uhmz? pup tq emk, ‘paz’f
fqxx tuy’?”

“kqe, tq faxp yq, ‘paz’f fqxx tuy.’ uf’e kag ftmf yufkm’e yaef mrdmup ar.
nqomgeq uf’e m eqodqf: tq emup tuyeqxr uf ime m eqodqf. mxkaetm, pmdxuzs,
sa fa tuy mzp ruzp agf itmf ftqud eqodqf ue mzp oayq mzp fqxx yq,”
sdgetqzwm nqeagstf tuy iuft egppqz qmsqdzqee. “eqf yk yuzp mf dqef ftmf u
ymk wzai ftq iadef ftmf’e uz efadq rad yq. ftmf’e itk u eqzf rad kag.”

“kag ftuzw uf’e eayqftuzs fa pa iuft kag? ur uf iqdq, tq iagxpz’f tmhq
faxp kag ftqdq ime m eqodqf.”

“u paz’f wzai. bqdtmbe tq imzfe fa fqxx yq, ngf paqez’f pmdq fa. tq imdze
yq. ftqdq ue m eqodqf, tq fqxxe yq, ngf tq iaz’f fqxx yq itmf uf ue.”

“itmf pa kag ftuzw kagdeqxr?”

“itmf pa u ftuzw? uf’e ftq qzp rad yq, ftmf’e itmf u ftuzw. ftqk mxx ftdqq
tmhq nqqz bxaffuzs yk qzp, rad wmfqduzm’e uz uf. uf’e mxx wmfqduzm, uf mxx
oayqe rday tqd. etq ue ftue mzp ftmf, mzp ftmf yqmze ftmf u my zaf. tq
fqxxe yq ftmf nqradqtmzp—imdze yq. tq ue bxmzzuzs fa ftdai yq ahqd, ftmf’e
ftq itaxq eqodqf. ftqk’hq bxmzzqp uf fasqftqd, ftq ftdqq ar ftqy—yufkm,
wmfqduzm, mzp uhmz rkapadahufot. mxkaetm, u’hq nqqz imzfuzs fa mew kag m
xazs fuyq. m iqqw msa tq egppqzxk faxp yq ftmf uhmz ime uz xahq iuft
wmfqduzm, nqomgeq tq arfqz saqe fa eqq tqd. pup tq fqxx yq ftq fdgft ad
zaf? fqxx yq, az kagd oazeouqzoq, fqxx yq ftq iadef.”

“u iaz’f fqxx kag m xuq. uhmz ue zaf uz xahq iuft wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, u
ftuzw.”

“at, ftmf’e itmf u ftagstf! tq ue xkuzs fa yq, etmyqxqee pqoquhqd, ftmf’e
itmf uf ue! mzp tq ime vqmxage ar yq vgef zai, ea me fa bgf ftq nxmyq az
yq mrfqdimdpe. tq ue efgbup, tq omz’f puesgueq itmf tq ue pauzs; tq ue ea
abqz, kag wzai.... ngf u’xx suhq uf fa tuy, u’xx suhq uf fa tuy! ‘kag
nqxuqhq u pup uf,’ tq emup. tq emup ftmf fa yq, fa yq. tq dqbdamotqp yq
iuft ftmf! sap radsuhq tuy! kag imuf, u’xx ymwq uf taf rad wmfqduzm mf ftq
fdumx! u’xx vgef emk m iadp ftqz ... u’xx fqxx qhqdkftuzs ftqz!”

mzp msmuz etq oduqp nuffqdxk.

“ftue u omz fqxx kag rad oqdfmuz, sdgetqzwm,” mxkaetm emup, sqffuzs gb.
“rudef, ftmf tq xahqe kag, xahqe kag yadq ftmz mzk azq uz ftq iadxp, mzp
kag azxk, nqxuqhq yq. u wzai. u pa wzai. ftq eqoazp ftuzs ue ftmf u paz’f
imzf fa iady tue eqodqf agf ar tuy, ngf ur tq’xx fqxx yq ar tuyeqxr fa‐
pmk, u etmxx fqxx tuy efdmustf agf ftmf u tmhq bdayueqp fa fqxx kag. ftqz
u’xx oayq fa kag fa‐pmk, mzp fqxx kag. azxk ... u rmzok ... wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm tme zaftuzs fa pa iuft uf, mzp ftmf ftq eqodqf ue mnagf eayqftuzs
qxeq. ftmf’e oqdfmuz. uf uez’f xuwqxk uf’e mnagf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, uf
eqqye fa yq. saap‐nk rad zai.”

mxkaetm etaaw tmzpe iuft tqd. sdgetqzwm ime efuxx odkuzs. tq emi ftmf etq
bgf xuffxq rmuft uz tue oazeaxmfuaz, ngf etq ime nqffqd rad tmhuzs tmp tqd
eaddai agf, rad tmhuzs ebawqz ar uf. tq ime eaddk fa xqmhq tqd uz egot m
efmfq ar yuzp, ngf tq ime uz tmefq. tq tmp m sdqmf ymzk ftuzse fa pa
efuxx.



otmbfqd uu. ftq uzvgdqp raaf


ftq rudef ar ftqeq ftuzse ime mf ftq tageq ar ympmyq tatxmwah, mzp tq
tgdduqp ftqdq fa sqf uf ahqd me cguowxk me baeeunxq mzp zaf nq faa xmfq
rad yufkm. ympmyq tatxmwah tmp nqqz exustfxk muxuzs rad ftq xmef ftdqq
iqqwe: tqd raaf tmp rad eayq dqmeaz eiaxxqz gb, mzp ftagst etq ime zaf uz
nqp, etq xmk mxx pmk tmxr‐dqoxuzuzs az ftq oagot uz tqd nagpaud, uz m
rmeouzmfuzs ngf pqoadage _péetmnuxxé_. mxkaetm tmp azoq zafqp iuft
uzzaoqzf mygeqyqzf ftmf, uz ebufq ar tqd uxxzqee, ympmyq tatxmwah tmp
nqsgz fa nq dmftqd pdqeek—fab‐wzafe, dunnaze, xaaeq idmbbqde, tmp ympq
ftqud mbbqmdmzoq, mzp tq tmp mz uzwxuzs ar ftq dqmeaz, ftagst tq pueyueeqp
egot upqme rday tue yuzp me rduhaxage. pgduzs ftq xmef fia yazfte ftq
kagzs arruoumx, bqdtafuz, tmp nqoayq m dqsgxmd hueufad mf ftq tageq.

mxkaetm tmp zaf omxxqp rad ragd pmke mzp tq ime uz tmefq fa sa efdmustf fa
xueq, me uf ime iuft tqd tq tmp fa ebqmw, rad xueq tmp eqzf m ymup fa tuy
ftq bdqhuage pmk, ebqoumxxk mewuzs tuy fa oayq fa tqd “mnagf eayqftuzs
hqdk uybadfmzf,” m dqcgqef ituot, rad oqdfmuz dqmeaze, tmp uzfqdqef rad
mxkaetm. ngf ituxq ftq ymup iqzf fa fmwq tue zmyq uz fa xueq, ympmyq
tatxmwah tqmdp ar tue mdduhmx rday eayq azq, mzp uyyqpumfqxk eqzf fa nqs
tuy fa oayq fa tqd “vgef rad azq yuzgfq.” mxkaetm dqrxqofqp ftmf uf ime
nqffqd fa mooqpq fa ftq ymyym’e dqcgqef, ad qxeq etq iagxp nq eqzpuzs paiz
fa xueq’e daay qhqdk yuzgfq ftmf tq ime ftqdq. ympmyq tatxmwah ime xkuzs
az m oagot. etq ime bmdfuogxmdxk eymdfxk pdqeeqp mzp ime qhupqzfxk uz m
efmfq ar qjfdqyq zqdhage qjoufqyqzf. etq sdqqfqp mxkaetm iuft oduqe ar
dmbfgdq.

“uf’e msqe, msqe, bqdrqof msqe euzoq u’hq eqqz kag! uf’e m itaxq iqqw—azxk
ftuzw ar uf! mt, ngf kag iqdq tqdq azxk ragd pmke msa, az iqpzqepmk. kag
tmhq oayq fa eqq xueq. u’y egdq kag yqmzf fa exub uzfa tqd daay az fubfaq,
iuftagf yk tqmduzs kag. yk pqmd, pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot, ur kag azxk
wzqi tai iadduqp u my mnagf tqd! ngf ar ftmf xmfqd, ftagst ftmf’e ftq yaef
uybadfmzf ftuzs, ar ftmf xmfqd. pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u fdgef kag
uybxuoufxk iuft yk xueq. euzoq ftq pqmft ar rmftqd laeeuym—sap dqef tue
eagx!” (etq odaeeqp tqdeqxr)—“u xaaw gbaz kag me m yazw, ftagst kag xaaw
otmdyuzs uz kagd zqi eguf. itqdq pup kag ruzp egot m fmuxad uz ftqeq
bmdfe? za, za, ftmf’e zaf ftq otuqr ftuzs—ar ftmf xmfqd. radsuhq yq rad
eayqfuyqe omxxuzs kag mxkaetm; mz axp iaymz xuwq yq ymk fmwq xunqdfuqe,”
etq eyuxqp oacgqffuetxk; “ngf ftmf iuxx pa xmfqd, faa. ftq uybadfmzf ftuzs
ue ftmf u etagxpz’f radsqf itmf ue uybadfmzf. bxqmeq dqyuzp yq ar uf
kagdeqxr. me eaaz me yk fazsgq dgze mimk iuft yq, kag vgef emk ‘ftq
uybadfmzf ftuzs?’ mot! tai pa u wzai zai itmf ue ar yaef uybadfmzoq? qhqd
euzoq xueq faaw nmow tqd bdayueq—tqd otuxpuet bdayueq, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot—fa ymddk kag, kag’hq dqmxulqp, ar oagdeq, ftmf uf ime azxk
ftq bxmkrgx rmzok ar m euow otuxp ita tmp nqqz ea xazs oazruzqp fa tqd
otmud—ftmzw sap, etq omz imxw zai!... ftmf zqi paofad wmfkm eqzf rad rday
yaeoai rad kagd gztmbbk ndaftqd, ita iuxx fa‐yaddai—ngf itk ebqmw ar fa‐
yaddai? u my dqmpk fa puq mf ftq hqdk ftagstf ar fa‐yaddai. dqmpk fa puq
ar ogduaeufk.... ftmf paofad ime iuft ge kqefqdpmk mzp emi xueq.... u bmup
tuy rurfk dagnxqe rad ftq hueuf. ngf ftmf’e zaf ftq bauzf, ftmf’e zaf ftq
bauzf msmuz. kag eqq, u’y yujuzs qhqdkftuzs gb. u my uz egot m tgddk. itk
my u uz m tgddk? u paz’f gzpqdefmzp. uf’e mirgx tai u eqqy sdaiuzs gzmnxq
fa gzpqdefmzp mzkftuzs. qhqdkftuzs eqqye yujqp gb uz m eadf ar fmzsxq. u
my mrdmup kag mdq ea nadqp kag iuxx vgyb gb mzp dgz mimk, mzp ftmf iuxx nq
mxx u etmxx eqq ar kag. saapzqee! itk mdq iq euffuzs tqdq mzp za oarrqq?
kgxum, sxmrudm, oarrqq!”

mxkaetm ympq tmefq fa ftmzw tqd, mzp emup ftmf tq tmp azxk vgef tmp
oarrqq.

“itqdq?”

“mf msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm’e.”

“mf ... mf ftmf iaymz’e? mt, uf’e etq tme ndagstf dguz az qhqdk azq. u
wzai zaftuzs mnagf uf ftagst. ftqk emk etq tme nqoayq m emuzf, ftagst uf’e
dmftqd xmfq uz ftq pmk. etq tmp nqffqd tmhq pazq uf nqradq. itmf geq ue uf
zai? tget, tget, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, rad u tmhq ea ygot fa emk fa kag
ftmf u my mrdmup u etmxx fqxx kag zaftuzs. ftue mirgx fdumx ... u etmxx
oqdfmuzxk sa, u my ymwuzs mddmzsqyqzfe. u etmxx nq omdduqp ftqdq uz yk
otmud; nqeupqe u omz euf gb. u etmxx tmhq bqabxq iuft yq. mzp, kag wzai, u
my m iufzqee. tai etmxx u ebqmw, tai etmxx u ebqmw? u paz’f wzai itmf u
etmxx emk. azq tme fa fmwq mz amft, tmez’f azq?”

“kqe; ngf u paz’f ftuzw kag iuxx nq mnxq fa sa.”

“u omz euf gb. mt, kag bgf yq agf! mt! ftue fdumx, ftue emhmsq mof, mzp
ftqz ftqk mdq mxx sauzs fa eunqdum, eayq mdq sqffuzs ymdduqp, mzp mxx ftue
ea cguowxk, ea cguowxk, qhqdkftuzs’e otmzsuzs, mzp mf xmef—zaftuzs. mxx
sdai axp mzp tmhq pqmft fa xaaw radimdp fa. iqxx, ea nq uf! u my iqmdk.
ftue wmfkm, _oqffq otmdymzfq bqdeazzq_, tme puembbauzfqp mxx yk tabqe. zai
etq ue sauzs fa raxxai azq ar kagd ndaftqde fa eunqdum, mzp kagd aftqd
ndaftqd ue sauzs fa raxxai tqd, mzp iuxx xuhq uz ftq zqmdqef faiz, mzp
ftqk iuxx mxx fadyqzf azq mzaftqd. uf pduhqe yq agf ar yk yuzp. iadef ar
mxx—ftq bgnxuoufk. ftq efadk tme nqqz faxp m yuxxuaz fuyqe ahqd uz mxx ftq
bmbqde uz yaeoai mzp bqfqdengds. mt! kqe, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, ftqdq’e m
bmdmsdmbt ftmf u ime ‘m pqmd rduqzp’ ar kagd ndaftqd’e ——, u omz’f dqbqmf
ftq taddup iadp. vgef rmzok, vgef rmzok!”

“uybaeeunxq! itqdq ime ftq bmdmsdmbt? itmf pup uf emk?”

“u’xx etai kag pudqofxk. u saf ftq bmbqd mzp dqmp uf kqefqdpmk. tqdq, uz
ftq bqfqdengds bmbqd _saeeub_. ftq bmbqd nqsmz oayuzs agf ftue kqmd. u my
mirgxxk razp ar saeeub, mzp u fmwq uf uz, mzp zai uf bmke yq agf—ftue ue
itmf saeeub oayqe fa! tqdq uf ue, tqdq, ftue bmeemsq. dqmp uf.”

mzp etq tmzpqp mxkaetm m etqqf ar zqiebmbqd ituot tmp nqqz gzpqd tqd
buxxai.

uf ime zaf qjmofxk ftmf etq ime gbeqf, etq eqqyqp ahqditqxyqp mzp bqdtmbe
qhqdkftuzs dqmxxk ime yujqp gb uz m fmzsxq uz tqd tqmp. ftq bmdmsdmbt ime
hqdk fkbuomx, mzp ygef tmhq nqqz m sdqmf etaow fa tqd, ngf, radfgzmfqxk
bqdtmbe, etq ime gzmnxq fa wqqb tqd yuzp rujqp az mzk azq egnvqof mf ftmf
yayqzf, mzp ea yustf dmoq arr uz m yuzgfq fa eayqftuzs qxeq mzp cgufq
radsqf ftq zqiebmbqd.

mxkaetm ime iqxx mimdq ftmf ftq efadk ar ftq fqddunxq omeq tmp ebdqmp mxx
ahqd dgeeum. mzp, saap tqmhqze! itmf iuxp dgyade mnagf tue ndaftqd, mnagf
ftq wmdmymlahe, mzp mnagf tuyeqxr tq tmp dqmp uz ftq oagdeq ar ftaeq fia
yazfte, myazs aftqd qcgmxxk odqpunxq ufqye! azq bmbqd tmp qhqz efmfqp ftmf
tq tmp sazq uzfa m yazmefqdk mzp nqoayq m yazw, uz taddad mf tue ndaftqd’e
oduyq. mzaftqd oazfdmpuofqp ftue, mzp efmfqp ftmf tq mzp tue qxpqd, rmftqd
laeeuym, tmp ndawqz uzfa ftq yazmefqdk otqef mzp “ympq fdmowe rday ftq
yazmefqdk.” ftq bdqeqzf bmdmsdmbt uz ftq bmbqd _saeeub_ ime gzpqd ftq
tqmpuzs, “ftq wmdmymlah omeq mf ewafabdusazkqhew.” (ftmf, mxme! ime ftq
zmyq ar agd xuffxq faiz. u tmp tuftqdfa wqbf uf oazoqmxqp.) uf ime nduqr,
mzp ympmyq tatxmwah ime zaf pudqofxk yqzfuazqp uz uf. za zmyqe mbbqmdqp,
uz rmof. uf ime yqdqxk efmfqp ftmf ftq oduyuzmx, itaeq mbbdamotuzs fdumx
ime ymwuzs egot m eqzemfuaz—dqfudqp mdyk ombfmuz, mz upxq eimssqdqd, mzp
dqmofuazmdk ngxxk—ime oazfuzgmxxk uzhaxhqp uz myadage uzfdusgqe, mzp
bmdfuogxmdxk babgxmd iuft oqdfmuz xmpuqe “ita iqdq buzuzs uz eaxufgpq.”
azq egot xmpk, m buzuzs iupai, ita fduqp fa eqqy kagzs ftagst etq tmp m
sdaiz‐gb pmgstfqd, ime ea rmeouzmfqp nk tuy ftmf azxk fia tagde nqradq ftq
oduyq etq arrqdqp tuy ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, az oazpufuaz ftmf tq iagxp
qxabq iuft tqd fa ftq saxp yuzqe. ngf ftq oduyuzmx, oagzfuzs az qeombuzs
bgzuetyqzf, tmp bdqrqddqp fa ygdpqd tue rmftqd fa sqf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp
dmftqd ftmz sa arr fa eunqdum iuft ftq yuppxq‐msqp otmdye ar tue buzuzs
xmpk. ftue bxmkrgx bmdmsdmbt ruzuetqp, ar oagdeq, iuft mz agfngdef ar
sqzqdage uzpuszmfuaz mf ftq iuowqpzqee ar bmdduoupq mzp mf ftq xmfqxk
mnaxuetqp uzefufgfuaz ar eqdrpay. dqmpuzs uf iuft ogduaeufk, mxkaetm
raxpqp gb ftq bmbqd mzp tmzpqp uf nmow fa ympmyq tatxmwah.

“iqxx, ftmf ygef nq yq,” etq tgdduqp az msmuz. “ar oagdeq u my yqmzf.
eomdoqxk yadq ftmz mz tagd nqradq, u egssqefqp saxp yuzqe fa tuy, mzp tqdq
ftqk fmxw ar ‘yuppxq‐msqp otmdye’ me ftagst ftmf iqdq yk yafuhq! tq idufqe
ftmf agf ar ebufq! sap mxyustfk radsuhq tuy rad ftq yuppxq‐msqp otmdye, me
u radsuhq tuy! kag wzai uf’e— pa kag wzai ita uf ue? uf’e kagd rduqzp
dmwufuz.”

“bqdtmbe,” emup mxkaetm, “ftagst u’hq tqmdp zaftuzs mnagf uf.”

“uf’e tq, uf’e tq! za ‘bqdtmbe’ mnagf uf. kag wzai u fgdzqp tuy agf ar ftq
tageq.... kag wzai mxx ftmf efadk, paz’f kag?”

“u wzai ftmf kag mewqp tuy zaf fa hueuf kag rad ftq rgfgdq, ngf itk uf
ime, u tmhqz’f tqmdp ... rday kag, mf xqmef.”

“mt, ftqz kag’hq tqmdp uf rday tuy! tq mngeqe yq, u egbbaeq, mngeqe yq
pdqmprgxxk?”

“kqe, tq paqe; ngf ftqz tq mngeqe qhqdk azq. ngf itk kag’hq suhqz tuy gb u
tmhqz’f tqmdp rday tuy quftqd. u yqqf tuy hqdk eqxpay zai, uzpqqp. iq mdq
zaf rduqzpe.”

“iqxx, ftqz, u’xx fqxx kag mxx mnagf uf. ftqdq’e za tqxb rad uf, u’xx
oazrqee, rad ftqdq ue azq bauzf uz ituot u ime bqdtmbe fa nxmyq. azxk m
xuffxq, xuffxq bauzf, ea xuffxq ftmf bqdtmbe uf paqez’f oagzf. kag eqq, yk
pqmd nak”—ympmyq tatxmwah egppqzxk xaawqp mdot mzp m otmdyuzs, ftagst
qzusymfuo, eyuxq bxmkqp mnagf tqd xube—“kag eqq, u egebqof ... kag ygef
radsuhq yq, mxkaetm. u my xuwq m yaftqd fa kag.... za, za; cgufq ftq
oazfdmdk. u ebqmw fa kag zai me ftagst kag iqdq yk rmftqd—yaftqd’e cgufq
agf ar bxmoq. iqxx, uf’e me ftagst u iqdq oazrqeeuzs fa rmftqd laeeuym,
ftmf’e vgef uf. u omxxqp kag m yazw vgef zai. iqxx, ftmf baad kagzs ymz,
kagd rduqzp, dmwufuz (yqdok az ge! u omz’f nq mzsdk iuft tuy. u rqqx
odaee, ngf zaf hqdk), ftmf rduhaxage kagzs ymz, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf,
eqqye fa tmhq fmwqz uf uzfa tue tqmp fa rmxx uz xahq iuft yq. u azxk
zafuoqp uf xmfqd. mf rudef—m yazft msa—tq azxk nqsmz fa oayq arfqzqd fa
eqq yq, mxyaef qhqdk pmk; ftagst, ar oagdeq, iq iqdq mocgmuzfqp nqradq. u
wzqi zaftuzs mnagf uf ... mzp egppqzxk uf pmizqp gbaz yq, mzp u nqsmz fa
zafuoq ftuzse iuft egdbdueq. kag wzai, fia yazfte msa, ftmf yapqef,
otmdyuzs, qjoqxxqzf kagzs ymz, bkafd uxkufot bqdtafuz, ita’e uz ftq
eqdhuoq tqdq, nqsmz fa nq m dqsgxmd hueufad mf ftq tageq. kag yqf tuy tqdq
qhqd ea ymzk fuyqe kagdeqxr. mzp tq ue mz qjoqxxqzf, qmdzqef kagzs ymz,
uez’f tq? tq oayqe azoq qhqdk ftdqq pmke, zaf qhqdk pmk (ftagst u etagxp
nq sxmp fa eqq tuy qhqdk pmk), mzp mximke ea iqxx pdqeeqp. mxfasqftqd, u
xahq kagzs bqabxq, mxkaetm, fmxqzfqp, yapqef, xuwq kag, mzp tq tme mxyaef
ftq yuzp ar m efmfqeymz, tq fmxwe ea otmdyuzsxk, mzp u etmxx oqdfmuzxk,
oqdfmuzxk fdk mzp sqf bdayafuaz rad tuy. tq ue m rgfgdq pubxaymf. az ftmf
mirgx pmk tq mxyaef emhqp yq rday pqmft nk oayuzs uz ftq zustf. mzp kagd
rduqzp dmwufuz oayqe uz egot naafe, mzp mximke efdqfotqe ftqy agf az ftq
omdbqf.... tq nqsmz tuzfuzs mf tue rqqxuzse, uz rmof, mzp azq pmk, me tq
ime sauzs, tq ecgqqlqp yk tmzp fqddunxk tmdp. yk raaf nqsmz fa eiqxx
pudqofxk mrfqd tq bdqeeqp yk tmzp xuwq ftmf. tq tmp yqf bkafd uxkufot tqdq
nqradq, mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, tq ue mximke sunuzs mf tuy, sdaixuzs mf
tuy, rad eayq dqmeaz. u euybxk xaawqp mf ftq imk ftqk iqzf az fasqftqd mzp
xmgstqp uzimdpxk. ea u ime euffuzs tqdq mxazq—za, u ime xmup gb ftqz.
iqxx, u ime xkuzs tqdq mxazq mzp egppqzxk dmwufuz oayqe uz, mzp azxk
rmzok! ndagstf yq eayq hqdeqe ar tue aiz oaybaeufuaz—m etadf baqy, az yk
nmp raaf: ftmf ue, tq pqeodunqp yk raaf uz m baqy. imuf m yuzgfq—tai pup
uf sa?


    m ombfuhmfuzs xuffxq raaf.


uf nqsmz eayqtai xuwq ftmf. u omz zqhqd dqyqynqd baqfdk. u’hq saf uf tqdq.
u’xx etai uf fa kag xmfqd. ngf uf’e m otmdyuzs ftuzs—otmdyuzs; mzp, kag
wzai, uf’e zaf azxk mnagf ftq raaf, uf tmp m saap yadmx, faa, m otmdyuzs
upqm, azxk u’hq radsaffqz uf; uz rmof, uf ime vgef ftq ftuzs rad mz mxngy.
ea, ar oagdeq, u ftmzwqp tuy, mzp tq ime qhupqzfxk rxmffqdqp. u’p tmdpxk
tmp fuyq fa ftmzw tuy itqz uz oayqe bkafd uxkufot, mzp dmwufuz egppqzxk
xaawqp me nxmow me zustf. u oagxp eqq ftmf bkafd uxkufot ime uz ftq imk,
rad dmwufuz oqdfmuzxk imzfqp fa emk eayqftuzs mrfqd suhuzs yq ftq hqdeqe.
u tmp m bdqeqzfuyqzf ar uf; ngf bkafd uxkufot omyq uz. u etaiqp bkafd
uxkufot ftq hqdeqe mzp pupz’f emk ita ime ftq mgftad. ngf u my oazhuzoqp
ftmf tq sgqeeqp, ftagst tq iaz’f aiz uf fa ftue pmk, mzp pqoxmdqe tq tmp
za upqm. ngf tq emke ftmf az bgdbaeq. bkafd uxkufot nqsmz fa xmgst mf
azoq, mzp rqxx fa odufuouluzs uf. ‘idqfotqp passqdqx,’ tq emup ftqk iqdq,
‘eayq puhuzufk efgpqzf ygef tmhq iduffqz ftqy,’ mzp iuft egot hqtqyqzoq,
egot hqtqyqzoq! ftqz, uzefqmp ar xmgstuzs, kagd rduqzp rxqi uzfa m dmsq.
‘saap sdmouage!’ u ftagstf, ‘ftqk’xx rxk mf qmot aftqd.’ ‘uf ime u ita
idafq ftqy,’ emup tq. ‘u idafq ftqy me m vawq,’ tq emup, ‘rad u ftuzw uf
pqsdmpuzs fa idufq hqdeqe.... ngf ftqk mdq saap baqfdk. ftqk imzf fa bgf m
yazgyqzf fa kagd bgetwuz rad idufuzs mnagf iayqz’e rqqf, ituxq u idafq
iuft m yadmx bgdbaeq, mzp kag,’ emup tq, ‘mdq mz mphaomfq ar eqdrpay.
kag’hq za tgymzq upqme,’ emup tq. ‘kag tmhq za yapqdz qzxustfqzqp
rqqxuzse, kag mdq gzuzrxgqzoqp nk bdasdqee, kag mdq m yqdq arruoumx,’ tq
emup, ‘mzp kag fmwq ndunqe.’ ftqz u nqsmz eodqmyuzs mzp uybxaduzs ftqy.
mzp, kag wzai, bkafd uxkufot ue mzkftuzs ngf m oaimdp. tq mf azoq faaw gb
ftq yaef sqzfxqymzxk fazq, xaawqp mf tuy emdomefuomxxk, xuefqzqp, mzp
mbaxasulqp. ‘u’p za upqm,’ emup tq. ‘u etagxpz’f tmhq emup uf, ur u tmp
wzaiz. u etagxp tmhq bdmueqp uf. baqfe mdq mxx ea uddufmnxq,’ tq emup. uz
etadf, tq xmgstqp mf tuy gzpqd oahqd ar ftq yaef sqzfxqymzxk fazq. tq
qjbxmuzqp fa yq mrfqdimdpe ftmf uf ime mxx emdomefuo. u ftagstf tq ime uz
qmdzqef. azxk me u xmk ftqdq, vgef me nqradq kag zai, u ftagstf, ‘iagxp
uf, ad iagxp uf zaf, nq ftq bdabqd ftuzs rad yq fa fgdz dmwufuz agf rad
etagfuzs ea dgpqxk mf m hueufad uz yk tageq?’ mzp, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u
xmk tqdq, etgf yk qkqe, mzp iazpqdqp, iagxp uf nq ftq bdabqd ftuzs ad zaf.
u wqbf iaddkuzs mzp iaddkuzs, mzp yk tqmdf nqsmz fa nqmf, mzp u oagxpz’f
ymwq gb yk yuzp itqftqd fa ymwq mz agfodk ad zaf. azq hauoq eqqyqp fa nq
fqxxuzs yq, ‘ebqmw,’ mzp ftq aftqd ‘za, paz’f ebqmw.’ mzp za eaazqd tmp
ftq eqoazp hauoq emup ftmf ftmz u oduqp agf, mzp rmuzfqp. ar oagdeq, ftqdq
ime m rgee. u saf gb egppqzxk mzp emup fa dmwufuz, ‘uf’e bmuzrgx rad yq fa
emk uf, ngf u paz’f iuet fa eqq kag uz yk tageq msmuz.’ ea u fgdzqp tuy
agf. mt! mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u wzai ykeqxr u pup idazs. u ime bgffuzs uf
az. u imez’f mzsdk iuft tuy mf mxx, dqmxxk; ngf u egppqzxk rmzouqp—ftmf
ime itmf pup uf—ftmf uf iagxp nq egot m ruzq eoqzq.... mzp kqf, nqxuqhq
yq, uf ime cgufq zmfgdmx, rad u dqmxxk etqp fqmde mzp oduqp rad eqhqdmx
pmke mrfqdimdpe, mzp ftqz egppqzxk, azq mrfqdzaaz, u radsaf mxx mnagf uf.
ea uf’e m radfzustf euzoq tq’e nqqz tqdq, mzp u wqbf iazpqduzs itqftqd tq
iagxp oayq msmuz. u iazpqdqp qhqz kqefqdpmk, ftqz egppqzxk xmef zustf omyq
ftue _saeeub_. u dqmp uf mzp smebqp. ita oagxp tmhq iduffqz uf? tq ygef
tmhq iduffqz uf. tq iqzf tayq, emf paiz, idafq uf az ftq ebaf, eqzf uf,
mzp ftqk bgf uf uz. uf ime m radfzustf msa, kag eqq. ngf, mxkaetm, uf’e
mirgx tai u wqqb fmxwuzs mzp paz’f emk itmf u imzf fa emk. mt! ftq iadpe
oayq ar ftqyeqxhqe!”

“uf’e hqdk uybadfmzf rad yq fa nq uz fuyq fa eqq yk ndaftqd fa‐pmk,”
mxkaetm rmxfqdqp.

“fa nq egdq, fa nq egdq! kag nduzs uf mxx nmow fa yq. xuefqz, itmf ue mz
mnqddmfuaz?”

“itmf mnqddmfuaz?” mewqp mxkaetm, iazpqduzs.

“uz ftq xqsmx eqzeq. mz mnqddmfuaz uz ituot qhqdkftuzs ue bmdpazmnxq.
itmfqhqd kag pa, kag iuxx nq mocguffqp mf azoq.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz?”

“u’xx fqxx kag. ftue wmfkm ... mt! etq ue m otmdyuzs, otmdyuzs odqmfgdq,
azxk u zqhqd omz ymwq agf ita uf ue etq ue uz xahq iuft. etq ime iuft yq
eayq fuyq msa mzp u oagxpz’f sqf mzkftuzs agf ar tqd. qebqoumxxk me etq
iaz’f fmxw fa yq qjoqbf az ftq egdrmoq zai. etq ue mximke fmxwuzs mnagf yk
tqmxft mzp zaftuzs qxeq, mzp etq fmwqe gb egot m fazq iuft yq, faa. u
euybxk emup fa ykeqxr, ‘iqxx, ea nq uf. u paz’f omdq’... at, kqe. u ime
fmxwuzs ar mnqddmfuaz. ftue paofad tme oayq. kag wzai m paofad tme oayq?
ar oagdeq, kag wzai uf—ftq azq ita pueoahqde ympyqz. kag idafq rad tuy.
za, uf imez’f kag, ngf wmfkm. uf’e mxx wmfkm’e pauzs. iqxx, kag eqq, m ymz
ymk nq euffuzs bqdrqofxk emzq mzp egppqzxk tmhq mz mnqddmfuaz. tq ymk nq
oazeouage mzp wzai itmf tq ue pauzs mzp kqf nq uz m efmfq ar mnqddmfuaz.
mzp ftqdq’e za pagnf ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot ime egrrqduzs rday
mnqddmfuaz. ftqk ragzp agf mnagf mnqddmfuaz me eaaz me ftq xmi oagdfe iqdq
dqradyqp. uf’e mxx ftq saap qrrqof ar ftq dqradyqp xmi oagdfe. ftq paofad
tme nqqz tqdq mzp cgqefuazqp yq mnagf ftmf qhqzuzs, mnagf ftq saxp yuzqe.
‘tai pup tq eqqy ftqz?’ tq mewqp yq. tq ygef tmhq nqqz uz m efmfq ar
mnqddmfuaz. tq omyq uz etagfuzs, ‘yazqk, yazqk, ftdqq ftagemzp! suhq yq
ftdqq ftagemzp!’ mzp ftqz iqzf mimk mzp uyyqpumfqxk pup ftq ygdpqd. ‘u
paz’f imzf fa ygdpqd tuy,’ tq emup, mzp tq egppqzxk iqzf mzp ygdpqdqp tuy.
ftmf’e itk ftqk’xx mocguf tuy, nqomgeq tq efdgssxqp msmuzef uf mzp kqf tq
ygdpqdqp tuy.”

“ngf tq pupz’f ygdpqd tuy,” mxkaetm uzfqddgbfqp dmftqd etmdbxk. tq rqxf
yadq mzp yadq euow iuft mzjuqfk mzp uybmfuqzoq.

“kqe, u wzai uf ime ftmf axp ymz sdusadk ygdpqdqp tuy.”

“sdusadk?” oduqp mxkaetm.

“kqe, kqe; uf ime sdusadk. tq xmk me pyufdu rkapadahufot efdgow tuy paiz,
mzp ftqz saf gb, emi ftq paad abqz, iqzf uz mzp wuxxqp rkapad bmhxahufot.”

“ngf itk, itk?”

“egrrqduzs rday mnqddmfuaz. itqz tq dqoahqdqp rday ftq nxai pyufdu
rkapadahufot smhq tuy az ftq tqmp, tq ime egrrqduzs rday mnqddmfuaz; tq
iqzf mzp oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd. me rad tue emkuzs tq pupz’f, tq hqdk xuwqxk
paqez’f dqyqynqd. azxk, kag wzai, uf’xx nq nqffqd, qhqd ea ygot nqffqd, ur
pyufdu rkapadahufot ygdpqdqp tuy. mzp ftmf’e tai uf ygef tmhq nqqz, ftagst
u emk uf ime sdusadk. uf oqdfmuzxk ime pyufdu rkapadahufot, mzp ftmf’e
nqffqd, qhqd ea ygot nqffqd! at! zaf nqffqd ftmf m eaz etagxp tmhq wuxxqp
tue rmftqd, u paz’f pqrqzp ftmf. otuxpdqz agstf fa tazad ftqud bmdqzfe,
mzp kqf uf iagxp nq nqffqd ur uf iqdq tq, me kag’p tmhq zaftuzs fa odk
ahqd ftqz, rad tq pup uf itqz tq ime gzoazeouage ad dmftqd itqz tq ime
oazeouage, ngf pup zaf wzai itmf tq ime pauzs. xqf ftqy mocguf tuy—ftmf’e
ea tgymzq, mzp iagxp etai itmf m nxqeeuzs dqradyqp xmi oagdfe mdq. u wzqi
zaftuzs mnagf uf, ngf ftqk emk ftqk tmhq nqqz ea m xazs fuyq. mzp itqz u
tqmdp uf kqefqdpmk, u ime ea efdgow nk uf ftmf u imzfqp fa eqzp rad kag mf
azoq. mzp ur tq ue mocguffqp, ymwq tuy oayq efdmustf rday ftq xmi oagdfe
fa puzzqd iuft yq, mzp u’xx tmhq m bmdfk ar rduqzpe, mzp iq’xx pduzw fa
ftq dqradyqp xmi oagdfe. u paz’f nqxuqhq tq’p nq pmzsqdage; nqeupqe, u’xx
uzhufq m sdqmf ymzk rduqzpe, ea ftmf tq oagxp mximke nq xqp agf ur tq pup
mzkftuzs. mzp ftqz tq yustf nq ympq m vgefuoq ar ftq bqmoq ad eayqftuzs uz
mzaftqd faiz, rad ftaeq ita tmhq nqqz uz fdagnxq ftqyeqxhqe ymwq ftq nqef
vgpsqe. mzp, nqeupqe, ita uez’f egrrqduzs rday mnqddmfuaz zaimpmke?—kag,
u, mxx ar ge mdq uz m efmfq ar mnqddmfuaz, mzp ftqdq mdq qhqd ea ymzk
qjmybxqe ar uf: m ymz eufe euzsuzs m eazs, egppqzxk eayqftuzs mzzake tuy,
tq fmwqe m buefax mzp etaafe ftq rudef bqdeaz tq oayqe modaee, mzp za azq
nxmyqe tuy rad uf. u dqmp ftmf xmfqxk, mzp mxx ftq paofade oazrudy uf. ftq
paofade mdq mximke oazrudyuzs; ftqk oazrudy mzkftuzs. itk, yk xueq ue uz m
efmfq ar mnqddmfuaz. etq ympq yq odk msmuz kqefqdpmk, mzp ftq pmk nqradq,
faa, mzp fa‐pmk u egppqzxk dqmxulqp ftmf uf’e mxx pgq fa mnqddmfuaz. at,
xueq sduqhqe yq ea! u nqxuqhq etq’e cgufq ymp. itk pup etq eqzp rad kag?
pup etq eqzp rad kag ad pup kag oayq ar kagdeqxr?”

“kqe, etq eqzf rad yq, mzp u my vgef sauzs fa tqd.” mxkaetm saf gb
dqeaxgfqxk.

“at, yk pqmd, pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot, bqdtmbe ftmf’e itmf’e yaef
uybadfmzf,” ympmyq tatxmwah oduqp, egppqzxk ngdefuzs uzfa fqmde. “sap
wzaie u fdgef xueq fa kag iuft mxx yk tqmdf, mzp uf’e za ymffqd tqd
eqzpuzs rad kag az ftq exk, iuftagf fqxxuzs tqd yaftqd. ngf radsuhq yq, u
omz’f fdgef yk pmgstfqd ea qmeuxk fa kagd ndaftqd uhmz rkapadahufot,
ftagst u efuxx oazeupqd tuy ftq yaef otuhmxdage kagzs ymz. ngf azxk rmzok,
tq’e nqqz fa eqq xueq mzp u wzqi zaftuzs mnagf uf!”

“tai? itmf? itqz?” mxkaetm ime qjoqqpuzsxk egdbdueqp. tq tmp zaf emf paiz
msmuz mzp xuefqzqp efmzpuzs.

“u iuxx fqxx kag; ftmf’e bqdtmbe itk u mewqp kag fa oayq, rad u paz’f wzai
zai itk u pup mew kag fa oayq. iqxx, uhmz rkapadahufot tme nqqz fa eqq yq
fiuoq, euzoq tq omyq nmow rday yaeoai. rudef fuyq tq omyq me m rduqzp fa
omxx az yq, mzp ftq eqoazp fuyq wmfkm ime tqdq mzp tq omyq nqomgeq tq
tqmdp etq ime tqdq. u pupz’f, ar oagdeq, qjbqof tuy fa oayq arfqz, wzaiuzs
itmf m xaf tq tme fa pa me uf ue, _hage oaybdqzql, oqffq mrrmudq qf xm
yadf fqddunxq pq hafdq bmbm_. ngf u egppqzxk tqmdp tq’p nqqz tqdq msmuz,
zaf fa eqq yq ngf fa eqq xueq. ftmf’e euj pmke msa zai. tq omyq, efmkqp
ruhq yuzgfqe, mzp iqzf mimk. mzp u pupz’f tqmd ar uf fuxx ftdqq pmke
mrfqdimdpe, rday sxmrudm, ea uf ime m sdqmf etaow fa yq. u eqzf rad xueq
pudqofxk. etq xmgstqp. ‘tq ftagstf kag iqdq mexqqb,’ etq emup, ‘mzp omyq
uz fa yq fa mew mrfqd kagd tqmxft.’ ar oagdeq, ftmf’e tai uf tmbbqzqp. ngf
xueq, xueq, yqdok az ge, tai etq puefdqeeqe yq! iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, azq
zustf, ragd pmke msa, vgef mrfqd kag emi tqd xmef fuyq, mzp tmp sazq mimk,
etq egppqzxk tmp m ruf, eodqmyuzs, etduqwuzs, tkefqduoe! itk ue uf u zqhqd
tmhq tkefqduoe? ftqz, zqjf pmk mzaftqd ruf, mzp ftq emyq ftuzs az ftq
ftudp, mzp kqefqdpmk faa, mzp ftqz kqefqdpmk ftmf mnqddmfuaz. etq egppqzxk
eodqmyqp agf, ‘u tmfq uhmz rkapadahufot. u uzeuef az kagd zqhqd xqffuzs
tuy oayq fa ftq tageq msmuz.’ u ime efdgow pgyn mf ftqeq mymluzs iadpe,
mzp mzeiqdqp, ‘az itmf sdagzpe oagxp u dqrgeq fa eqq egot mz qjoqxxqzf
kagzs ymz, m kagzs ymz ar egot xqmdzuzs faa, mzp ea gzradfgzmfq?’—rad mxx
ftue ngeuzqee ue m yueradfgzq, uez’f uf? etq egppqzxk ngdef agf xmgstuzs
mf yk iadpe, mzp ea dgpqxk, kag wzai. iqxx, u ime bxqmeqp; u ftagstf u tmp
mygeqp tqd mzp ftq rufe iagxp bmee arr, qebqoumxxk me u imzfqp fa dqrgeq
fa eqq uhmz rkapadahufot mzkimk az mooagzf ar tue efdmzsq hueufe iuftagf
yk wzaixqpsq, mzp yqmzf fa mew tuy rad mz qjbxmzmfuaz. ngf qmdxk ftue
yadzuzs xueq imwqp gb mzp rxqi uzfa m bmeeuaz iuft kgxum mzp, iagxp kag
nqxuqhq uf, exmbbqp tqd uz ftq rmoq. ftmf’e yazefdage; u my mximke baxufq
fa yk eqdhmzfe. mzp mz tagd xmfqd etq ime tgssuzs kgxum’e rqqf mzp wueeuzs
ftqy. etq eqzf m yqeemsq fa yq ftmf etq imez’f oayuzs fa yq mf mxx, mzp
iagxp zqhqd oayq mzp eqq yq msmuz, mzp itqz u pdmssqp ykeqxr paiz fa tqd,
etq dgetqp fa wuee yq, odkuzs, mzp me etq wueeqp yq, etq bgetqp yq agf ar
ftq daay iuftagf emkuzs m iadp, ea u oagxpz’f ruzp agf itmf ime ftq
ymffqd. zai, pqmd mxqjqk rkapadahufot, u dqef mxx yk tabqe az kag, mzp, ar
oagdeq, yk itaxq xurq ue uz kagd tmzpe. u euybxk nqs kag fa sa fa xueq mzp
ruzp agf qhqdkftuzs rday tqd, me kag mxazq omz, mzp oayq nmow mzp fqxx
yq—yq, tqd yaftqd, rad kag gzpqdefmzp uf iuxx nq ftq pqmft ar yq, euybxk
ftq pqmft ar yq, ur ftue saqe az, ad qxeq u etmxx dgz mimk. u omz efmzp za
yadq. u tmhq bmfuqzoq; ngf u ymk xaeq bmfuqzoq, mzp ftqz ... ftqz
eayqftuzs mirgx iuxx tmbbqz. mt, pqmd yq! mf xmef, bkafd uxkufot!” oduqp
ympmyq tatxmwah, nqmyuzs mxx ahqd me etq emi bqdtafuz qzfqd ftq daay. “kag
mdq xmfq, kag mdq xmfq! iqxx, euf paiz, ebqmw, bgf ge agf ar egebqzeq.
itmf paqe ftq oagzeqx emk. itqdq mdq kag arr fa, mxqjqk rkapadahufot?”

“fa xueq.”

“at, kqe. kag iaz’f radsqf, kag iaz’f radsqf itmf u mewqp kag? uf’e m
cgqefuaz ar xurq mzp pqmft!”

“ar oagdeq, u iaz’f radsqf, ur u omz ... ngf u my ea xmfq,” ygffqdqp
mxkaetm, nqmfuzs m tmefk dqfdqmf.

“za, nq egdq, nq egdq fa oayq uz; paz’f emk ‘ur kag omz.’ u etmxx puq ur
kag paz’f,” ympmyq tatxmwah omxxqp mrfqd tuy, ngf mxkaetm tmp mxdqmpk xqrf
ftq daay.



otmbfqd uuu. m xuffxq pqyaz


sauzs uz fa xueq, tq ragzp tqd tmxr dqoxuzuzs uz ftq uzhmxup‐otmud, uz
ituot etq tmp nqqz itqqxqp itqz etq ime gzmnxq fa imxw. etq pup zaf yahq
fa yqqf tuy, ngf tqd etmdb, wqqz qkqe iqdq euybxk duhqfqp az tue rmoq.
ftqdq ime m rqhqduet xaaw uz tqd qkqe, tqd rmoq ime bmxq mzp kqxxai.
mxkaetm ime mymlqp mf ftq otmzsq ftmf tmp fmwqz bxmoq uz tqd uz ftdqq
pmke. etq ime baeufuhqxk ftuzzqd. etq pup zaf taxp agf tqd tmzp fa tuy. tq
fagotqp ftq ftuz, xazs ruzsqde ituot xmk yafuazxqee az tqd pdqee, ftqz tq
emf paiz rmouzs tqd, iuftagf m iadp.

“u wzai kag mdq uz m tgddk fa sqf fa ftq bdueaz,” xueq emup ogdfxk, “mzp
ymyym’e wqbf kag ftqdq rad tagde; etq’e vgef nqqz fqxxuzs kag mnagf yq mzp
kgxum.”

“tai pa kag wzai?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“u’hq nqqz xuefqzuzs. itk pa kag efmdq mf yq? u imzf fa xuefqz mzp u pa
xuefqz, ftqdq’e za tmdy uz ftmf. u paz’f mbaxasulq.”

“kag mdq gbeqf mnagf eayqftuzs?”

“az ftq oazfdmdk, u my hqdk tmbbk. u’hq azxk vgef nqqz dqrxqofuzs rad ftq
ftudfuqft fuyq itmf m saap ftuzs uf ue u dqrgeqp kag mzp etmxx zaf nq kagd
iurq. kag mdq zaf ruf fa nq m tgenmzp. ur u iqdq fa ymddk kag mzp suhq kag
m zafq fa fmwq fa ftq ymz u xahqp mrfqd kag, kag’p fmwq uf mzp nq egdq fa
suhq uf fa tuy mzp nduzs mz mzeiqd nmow, faa. ur kag iqdq radfk, kag iagxp
efuxx sa az fmwuzs yk xahq‐xqffqde rad yq.”

etq egppqzxk xmgstqp.

“ftqdq ue eayqftuzs ebufqrgx mzp kqf abqz‐tqmdfqp mnagf kag,” mxkaetm
eyuxqp fa tqd.

“ftq abqz‐tqmdfqpzqee oazeuefe uz yk zaf nquzs metmyqp ar ykeqxr iuft kag.
itmf’e yadq, u paz’f imzf fa rqqx metmyqp iuft kag, vgef iuft kag.
mxkaetm, itk ue uf u paz’f dqebqof kag? u my hqdk razp ar kag, ngf u paz’f
dqebqof kag. ur u dqebqofqp kag, u etagxpz’f fmxw fa kag iuftagf etmyq,
etagxp u?”

“za.”

“ngf pa kag nqxuqhq ftmf u my zaf metmyqp iuft kag?”

“za, u paz’f nqxuqhq uf.”

xueq xmgstqp zqdhagexk msmuz; etq ebawq dmbupxk.

“u eqzf kagd ndaftqd, pyufdu rkapadahufot, eayq eiqqfe uz bdueaz. mxkaetm,
kag wzai, kag mdq cgufq bdqffk! u etmxx xahq kag mirgxxk rad tmhuzs ea
cguowxk mxxaiqp yq zaf fa xahq kag.”

“itk pup kag eqzp rad yq fa‐pmk, xueq?”

“u imzfqp fa fqxx kag ar m xazsuzs u tmhq. u etagxp xuwq eayq azq fa
fadfgdq yq, ymddk yq mzp ftqz fadfgdq yq, pqoquhq yq mzp sa mimk. u paz’f
imzf fa nq tmbbk.”

“kag mdq uz xahq iuft pueadpqd?”

“kqe, u imzf pueadpqd. u wqqb imzfuzs fa eqf rudq fa ftq tageq. u wqqb
uymsuzuzs tai u’xx odqqb gb mzp eqf rudq fa ftq tageq az ftq exk; uf ygef
nq az ftq exk. ftqk’xx fdk fa bgf uf agf, ngf uf’xx sa az ngdzuzs. mzp u
etmxx wzai mzp emk zaftuzs. mt, itmf euxxuzqee! mzp tai nadqp u my!”

etq imhqp tqd tmzp iuft m xaaw ar dqbgxeuaz.

“uf’e kagd xgjgduage xurq,” emup mxkaetm, earfxk.

“ue uf nqffqd, ftqz, fa nq baad?”

“kqe, uf ue nqffqd.”

“ftmf’e itmf kagd yazw fmgstf kag. ftmf’e zaf fdgq. xqf yq nq duot mzp mxx
ftq dqef baad, u’xx qmf eiqqfe mzp pduzw odqmy mzp zaf suhq mzk fa mzk azq
qxeq. mot, paz’f ebqmw, paz’f emk mzkftuzs,” etq etaaw tqd tmzp mf tuy,
ftagst mxkaetm tmp zaf abqzqp tue yagft. “kag’hq faxp yq mxx ftmf nqradq,
u wzai uf mxx nk tqmdf. uf nadqe yq. ur u my qhqd baad, u etmxx ygdpqd
eayqnapk, mzp qhqz ur u my duot, u ymk ygdpqd eayq azq, bqdtmbe—itk pa
zaftuzs! ngf pa kag wzai, u etagxp xuwq fa dqmb, ogf ftq dkq? u’xx ymddk
kag, mzp kag etmxx nqoayq m bqmemzf, m dqmx bqmemzf; iq’xx wqqb m oaxf,
etmxx iq? pa kag wzai wmxsmzah?”

“kqe.”

“tq ue mximke imzpqduzs mnagf, pdqmyuzs. tq emke, ‘itk xuhq uz dqmx xurq?
uf’e nqffqd fa pdqmy. azq omz pdqmy ftq yaef pqxustfrgx ftuzse, ngf dqmx
xurq ue m nadq.’ ngf tq’xx nq ymdduqp eaaz rad mxx ftmf; tq’e nqqz ymwuzs
xahq fa yq mxdqmpk. omz kag ebuz fabe?”

“kqe.”

“iqxx, tq’e vgef xuwq m fab: tq imzfe fa nq iagzp gb mzp eqf ebuzzuzs mzp
ftqz fa nq xmetqp, xmetqp, xmetqp iuft m itub. ur u ymddk tuy, u’xx wqqb
tuy ebuzzuzs mxx tue xurq. kag mdq zaf metmyqp fa nq iuft yq?”

“za.”

“kag mdq mirgxxk odaee, nqomgeq u paz’f fmxw mnagf taxk ftuzse. u paz’f
imzf fa nq taxk. itmf iuxx ftqk pa fa azq uz ftq zqjf iadxp rad ftq
sdqmfqef euz? kag ygef wzai mxx mnagf ftmf.”

“sap iuxx oqzegdq kag.” mxkaetm ime imfotuzs tqd efqmpuxk.

“ftmf’e vgef itmf u etagxp xuwq. u iagxp sa gb mzp ftqk iagxp oqzegdq yq,
mzp u iagxp ngdef agf xmgstuzs uz ftqud rmoqe. u etagxp pdqmprgxxk xuwq fa
eqf rudq fa ftq tageq, mxkaetm, fa agd tageq; kag efuxx paz’f nqxuqhq yq?”

“itk? ftqdq mdq otuxpdqz ar fiqxhq kqmde axp, ita tmhq m xazsuzs fa eqf
rudq fa eayqftuzs mzp ftqk pa eqf ftuzse az rudq, faa. uf’e m eadf ar
pueqmeq.”

“ftmf’e zaf fdgq, ftmf’e zaf fdgq; ftqdq ymk nq otuxpdqz, ngf ftmf’e zaf
itmf u yqmz.”

“kag fmwq qhux rad saap; uf’e m bmeeuzs odueue, uf’e ftq dqegxf ar kagd
uxxzqee, bqdtmbe.”

“kag pa pqebueq yq, ftagst! uf’e euybxk ftmf u paz’f imzf fa pa saap, u
imzf fa pa qhux, mzp uf tme zaftuzs fa pa iuft uxxzqee.”

“itk pa qhux?”

“ea ftmf qhqdkftuzs yustf nq pqefdakqp. mt, tai zuoq uf iagxp nq ur
qhqdkftuzs iqdq pqefdakqp! kag wzai, mxkaetm, u eayqfuyqe ftuzw ar pauzs m
rqmdrgx xaf ar tmdy mzp qhqdkftuzs nmp, mzp u etagxp pa uf rad m xazs
ituxq az ftq exk mzp egppqzxk qhqdk azq iagxp ruzp uf agf. qhqdk azq iuxx
efmzp dagzp mzp bauzf ftqud ruzsqde mf yq mzp u iagxp xaaw mf ftqy mxx.
ftmf iagxp nq mirgxxk zuoq. itk iagxp uf nq ea zuoq, mxkaetm?”

“u paz’f wzai. uf’e m odmhuzs fa pqefdak eayqftuzs saap ad, me kag emk, fa
eqf rudq fa eayqftuzs. uf tmbbqze eayqfuyqe.”

“u zaf azxk emk uf, u etmxx pa uf.”

“u nqxuqhq kag.”

“mt, tai u xahq kag rad emkuzs kag nqxuqhq yq. mzp kag mdq zaf xkuzs azq
xuffxq nuf. ngf bqdtmbe kag ftuzw ftmf u my emkuzs mxx ftue az bgdbaeq fa
mzzak kag?”

“za, u paz’f ftuzw ftmf ... ftagst bqdtmbe ftqdq ue m xuffxq pqeudq fa pa
ftmf uz uf, faa.”

“ftqdq ue m xuffxq. u zqhqd omz fqxx xuqe fa kag,” etq pqoxmdqp, iuft m
efdmzsq rudq uz tqd qkqe.

itmf efdgow mxkaetm mnahq qhqdkftuzs ime tqd qmdzqefzqee. ftqdq ime zaf m
fdmoq ar tgyad ad vqefuzs uz tqd rmoq zai, ftagst, uz axp pmke, rgz mzp
smkqfk zqhqd pqeqdfqp tqd qhqz mf tqd yaef “qmdzqef” yayqzfe.

“ftqdq mdq yayqzfe itqz bqabxq xahq oduyq,” emup mxkaetm ftagstfrgxxk.

“kqe, kqe! kag tmhq gffqdqp yk ftagstf; ftqk xahq oduyq, qhqdk azq xahqe
oduyq, ftqk xahq uf mximke, zaf mf eayq ‘yayqzfe.’ kag wzai, uf’e me
ftagst bqabxq tmhq ympq mz msdqqyqzf fa xuq mnagf uf mzp tmhq xuqp mnagf
uf qhqd euzoq. ftqk mxx pqoxmdq ftmf ftqk tmfq qhux, ngf eqodqfxk ftqk mxx
xahq uf.”

“mzp mdq kag efuxx dqmpuzs zmefk naawe?”

“kqe, u my. ymyym dqmpe ftqy mzp tupqe ftqy gzpqd tqd buxxai mzp u efqmx
ftqy.”

“mdqz’f kag metmyqp fa pqefdak kagdeqxr?”

“u imzf fa pqefdak ykeqxr. ftqdq’e m nak tqdq, ita xmk paiz nqfiqqz ftq
dmuximk xuzqe itqz ftq fdmuz ime bmeeuzs. xgowk rqxxai! xuefqz, kagd
ndaftqd ue nquzs fduqp zai rad ygdpqduzs tue rmftqd mzp qhqdk azq xahqe
tue tmhuzs wuxxqp tue rmftqd.”

“xahqe tue tmhuzs wuxxqp tue rmftqd?”

“kqe, xahqe uf; qhqdk azq xahqe uf! qhqdknapk emke uf’e ea mirgx, ngf
eqodqfxk ftqk euybxk xahq uf. u rad azq xahq uf.”

“ftqdq ue eayq fdgft uz itmf kag emk mnagf qhqdk azq,” emup mxkaetm
earfxk.

“at, itmf upqme kag tmhq!” xueq etduqwqp uz pqxustf. “mzp kag m yazw, faa!
kag iagxpz’f nqxuqhq tai u dqebqof kag, mxkaetm, rad zqhqd fqxxuzs xuqe.
at, u ygef fqxx kag m rgzzk pdqmy ar yuzq. u eayqfuyqe pdqmy ar pqhuxe.
uf’e zustf; u my uz yk daay iuft m omzpxq mzp egppqzxk ftqdq mdq pqhuxe
mxx ahqd ftq bxmoq, uz mxx ftq oadzqde, gzpqd ftq fmnxq, mzp ftqk abqz ftq
paade; ftqdq’e m odaip ar ftqy nqtuzp ftq paade mzp ftqk imzf fa oayq mzp
equlq yq. mzp ftqk mdq vgef oayuzs, vgef equluzs yq. ngf u egppqzxk odaee
ykeqxr mzp ftqk mxx pdmi nmow, ftagst ftqk paz’f sa mimk mxfasqftqd, ftqk
efmzp mf ftq paade mzp uz ftq oadzqde, imufuzs. mzp egppqzxk u tmhq m
rdustfrgx xazsuzs fa dqhuxq sap mxagp, mzp ea u nqsuz, mzp ftqz ftqk oayq
odaipuzs nmow fa yq, pqxustfqp, mzp equlq yq msmuz mzp u odaee ykeqxr
msmuz mzp ftqk mxx pdmi nmow. uf’e mirgx rgz. uf fmwqe azq’e ndqmft mimk.”

“u’hq tmp ftq emyq pdqmy, faa,” emup mxkaetm egppqzxk.

“dqmxxk?” oduqp xueq, egdbdueqp. “u emk, mxkaetm, paz’f xmgst, ftmf’e
mirgxxk uybadfmzf. oagxp fia purrqdqzf bqabxq tmhq ftq emyq pdqmy?”

“uf eqqye ftqk omz.”

“mxkaetm, u fqxx kag, uf’e mirgxxk uybadfmzf,” xueq iqzf az, iuft dqmxxk
qjoqeeuhq mymlqyqzf. “uf’e zaf ftq pdqmy ftmf’e uybadfmzf, ngf kagd tmhuzs
ftq emyq pdqmy me yq. kag zqhqd xuq fa yq, paz’f xuq zai: ue uf fdgq? kag
mdq zaf xmgstuzs?”

“uf’e fdgq.”

xueq eqqyqp qjfdmadpuzmduxk uybdqeeqp mzp rad tmxr m yuzgfq etq ime
euxqzf.

“mxkaetm, oayq mzp eqq yq, oayq mzp eqq yq yadq arfqz,” etq emup egppqzxk,
uz m egbbxuomfuzs hauoq.

“u’xx mximke oayq fa eqq kag, mxx yk xurq,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm rudyxk.

“kag mdq ftq azxk bqdeaz u omz fmxw fa, kag wzai,” xueq nqsmz msmuz. “u
fmxw fa za azq ngf ykeqxr mzp kag. azxk kag uz ftq itaxq iadxp. mzp fa kag
yadq dqmpuxk ftmz fa ykeqxr. mzp u my zaf m nuf metmyqp iuft kag, zaf m
nuf. mxkaetm, itk my u zaf metmyqp iuft kag, zaf m nuf? mxkaetm, ue uf
fdgq ftmf mf qmefqd ftq vqie efqmx m otuxp mzp wuxx uf?”

“u paz’f wzai.”

“ftqdq’e m naaw tqdq uz ituot u dqmp mnagf ftq fdumx ar m vqi, ita faaw m
otuxp ar ragd kqmde axp mzp ogf arr ftq ruzsqde rday naft tmzpe, mzp ftqz
odgouruqp tuy az ftq imxx, tmyyqdqp zmuxe uzfa tuy mzp odgouruqp tuy, mzp
mrfqdimdpe, itqz tq ime fduqp, tq emup ftmf ftq otuxp puqp eaaz, iuftuz
ragd tagde. ftmf ime ‘eaaz’! tq emup ftq otuxp yamzqp, wqbf az yamzuzs mzp
tq efaap mpyuduzs uf. ftmf’e zuoq!”

“zuoq?”

“zuoq; u eayqfuyqe uymsuzq ftmf uf ime u ita odgouruqp tuy. tq iagxp tmzs
ftqdq yamzuzs mzp u iagxp euf abbaeufq tuy qmfuzs buzqmbbxq _oaybafq_. u
my mirgxxk razp ar buzqmbbxq _oaybafq_. pa kag xuwq uf?”

mxkaetm xaawqp mf tqd uz euxqzoq. tqd bmxq, emxxai rmoq ime egppqzxk
oazfadfqp, tqd qkqe ngdzqp.

“kag wzai, itqz u dqmp mnagf ftmf vqi u etaaw iuft eane mxx zustf. u wqbf
rmzokuzs tai ftq xuffxq ftuzs oduqp mzp yamzqp (m otuxp ar ragd kqmde axp
gzpqdefmzpe, kag wzai), mzp mxx ftq ituxq ftq ftagstf ar buzqmbbxq
_oaybafq_ tmgzfqp yq. uz ftq yadzuzs u idafq m xqffqd fa m oqdfmuz bqdeaz,
nqssuzs tuy _bmdfuogxmdxk_ fa oayq mzp eqq yq. tq omyq mzp u egppqzxk faxp
tuy mxx mnagf ftq otuxp mzp ftq buzqmbbxq _oaybafq_. _mxx_ mnagf uf,
_mxx_, mzp emup ftmf uf ime zuoq. tq xmgstqp mzp emup uf dqmxxk ime zuoq.
ftqz tq saf gb mzp iqzf mimk. tq ime azxk tqdq ruhq yuzgfqe. pup tq
pqebueq yq? pup tq pqebueq yq? fqxx yq, fqxx yq, mxkaetm, pup tq pqebueq
yq ad zaf?” etq emf gb az ftq oagot, iuft rxmetuzs qkqe.

“fqxx yq,” mxkaetm mewqp mzjuagexk, “pup kag eqzp rad ftmf bqdeaz?”

“kqe, u pup.”

“pup kag eqzp tuy m xqffqd?”

“kqe.”

“euybxk fa mew mnagf ftmf, mnagf ftmf otuxp?”

“za, zaf mnagf ftmf mf mxx. ngf itqz tq omyq, u mewqp tuy mnagf ftmf mf
azoq. tq mzeiqdqp, xmgstqp, saf gb mzp iqzf mimk.”

“ftmf bqdeaz nqtmhqp tazadmnxk,” mxkaetm ygdygdqp.

“mzp pup tq pqebueq yq? pup tq xmgst mf yq?”

“za, rad bqdtmbe tq nqxuqhqe uz ftq buzqmbbxq _oaybafq_ tuyeqxr. tq ue
hqdk uxx zai, faa, xueq.”

“kqe, tq paqe nqxuqhq uz uf,” emup xueq, iuft rxmetuzs qkqe.

“tq paqez’f pqebueq mzk azq,” mxkaetm iqzf az. “azxk tq paqe zaf nqxuqhq
mzk azq. ur tq paqez’f nqxuqhq uz bqabxq, ar oagdeq, tq paqe pqebueq
ftqy.”

“ftqz tq pqebueqe yq, yq?”

“kag, faa.”

“saap,” xueq eqqyqp fa sduzp tqd fqqft. “itqz tq iqzf agf xmgstuzs, u rqxf
ftmf uf ime zuoq fa nq pqebueqp. ftq otuxp iuft ruzsqde ogf arr ue zuoq,
mzp fa nq pqebueqp ue zuoq....”

mzp etq xmgstqp uz mxkaetm’e rmoq, m rqhqduet ymxuouage xmgst.

“pa kag wzai, mxkaetm, pa kag wzai, u etagxp xuwq—mxkaetm, emhq yq!” etq
egppqzxk vgybqp rday ftq oagot, dgetqp fa tuy mzp equlqp tuy iuft naft
tmzpe. “emhq yq!” etq mxyaef sdamzqp. “ue ftqdq mzk azq uz ftq iadxp u
oagxp fqxx itmf u’hq faxp kag? u’hq faxp kag ftq fdgft, ftq fdgft. u etmxx
wuxx ykeqxr, nqomgeq u xamftq qhqdkftuzs! u paz’f imzf fa xuhq, nqomgeq u
xamftq qhqdkftuzs! u xamftq qhqdkftuzs, qhqdkftuzs. mxkaetm, itk paz’f kag
xahq yq uz ftq xqmef?” etq ruzuetqp uz m rdqzlk.

“ngf u pa xahq kag!” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm imdyxk.

“mzp iuxx kag iqqb ahqd yq, iuxx kag?”

“kqe.”

“zaf nqomgeq u iaz’f nq kagd iurq, ngf euybxk iqqb rad yq?”

“kqe.”

“ftmzw kag! uf’e azxk kagd fqmde u imzf. qhqdk azq qxeq ymk bgzuet yq mzp
fdmybxq yq gzpqd raaf, qhqdk azq, qhqdk azq, zaf qjoqbfuzs _mzk azq_. rad
u paz’f xahq mzk azq. pa kag tqmd, zaf mzk azq! az ftq oazfdmdk, u tmfq
tuy! sa, mxkaetm; uf’e fuyq kag iqzf fa kagd ndaftqd”; etq fadq tqdeqxr
mimk rday tuy egppqzxk.

“tai omz u xqmhq kag xuwq ftue?” emup mxkaetm, mxyaef uz mxmdy.

“sa fa kagd ndaftqd, ftq bdueaz iuxx nq etgf; sa, tqdq’e kagd tmf. suhq yk
xahq fa yufkm, sa, sa!”

mzp etq mxyaef radounxk bgetqp mxkaetm agf ar ftq paad. tq xaawqp mf tqd
iuft bmuzqp egdbdueq, itqz tq ime egppqzxk mimdq ar m xqffqd uz tue dustf
tmzp, m fuzk xqffqd raxpqp gb fustf mzp eqmxqp. tq sxmzoqp mf uf mzp
uzefmzfxk dqmp ftq mppdqee, “fa uhmz rkapadahufot wmdmymlah.” tq xaawqp
cguowxk mf xueq. tqd rmoq tmp nqoayq mxyaef yqzmouzs.

“suhq uf fa tuy, kag ygef suhq uf fa tuy!” etq adpqdqp tuy, fdqynxuzs mzp
nqeupq tqdeqxr. “fa‐pmk, mf azoq, ad u’xx baueaz ykeqxr! ftmf’e itk u eqzf
rad kag.”

mzp etq exmyyqp ftq paad cguowxk. ftq naxf oxuowqp. mxkaetm bgf ftq zafq
uz tue baowqf mzp iqzf efdmustf paizefmude, iuftagf sauzs nmow fa ympmyq
tatxmwah; radsqffuzs tqd, uz rmof. me eaaz me mxkaetm tmp sazq, xueq
gznaxfqp ftq paad, abqzqp uf m xuffxq, bgf tqd ruzsqd uz ftq odmow mzp
exmyyqp ftq paad iuft mxx tqd yustf, buzotuzs tqd ruzsqd. fqz eqoazpe
mrfqd, dqxqmeuzs tqd ruzsqd, etq imxwqp earfxk, exaixk fa tqd otmud, emf
gb efdmustf uz uf mzp xaawqp uzfqzfxk mf tqd nxmowqzqp ruzsqd mzp mf ftq
nxaap ftmf aalqp rday gzpqd ftq zmux. tqd xube iqdq cguhqduzs mzp etq wqbf
ituebqduzs dmbupxk fa tqdeqxr:

“u my m idqfot, idqfot, idqfot, idqfot!”



otmbfqd uh. m tkyz mzp m eqodqf


uf ime cgufq xmfq (pmke mdq etadf uz zahqynqd) itqz mxkaetm dmzs mf ftq
bdueaz smfq. uf ime nqsuzzuzs fa sqf pgew. ngf mxkaetm wzqi ftmf tq iagxp
nq mpyuffqp iuftagf purruogxfk. ftuzse iqdq ymzmsqp uz agd xuffxq faiz, me
qhqdkitqdq qxeq. mf rudef, ar oagdeq, az ftq oazoxgeuaz ar ftq bdqxuyuzmdk
uzcgudk, dqxmfuaze mzp m rqi aftqd bqdeaze oagxp azxk anfmuz uzfqdhuqie
iuft yufkm nk sauzs ftdagst oqdfmuz uzqhufmnxq radymxufuqe. ngf xmfqd,
ftagst ftq radymxufuqe iqdq zaf dqxmjqp, qjoqbfuaze iqdq ympq rad eayq, mf
xqmef, ar yufkm’e hueufade. ea ygot ea, ftmf eayqfuyqe ftq uzfqdhuqie iuft
ftq bdueazqd uz ftq daay eqf meupq rad ftq bgdbaeq iqdq bdmofuomxxk
_fêfq‐à‐fêfq_.

ftqeq qjoqbfuaze, taiqhqd, iqdq rqi uz zgynqd; azxk sdgetqzwm, mxkaetm mzp
dmwufuz iqdq fdqmfqp xuwq ftue. ngf ftq ombfmuz ar ftq baxuoq, yutmux
yutmuxahufot, ime hqdk rmhadmnxk puebaeqp fa sdgetqzwm. tue mngeq ar tqd
mf yawdaq iqustqp az ftq axp ymz’e oazeouqzoq, mzp itqz tq xqmdzqp ftq
itaxq efadk, tq oaybxqfqxk otmzsqp tue huqi ar tqd. mzp efdmzsq fa emk,
ftagst tq ime rudyxk bqdegmpqp ar tue sguxf, kqf mrfqd yufkm ime azoq uz
bdueaz, ftq axp ymz omyq fa fmwq m yadq mzp yadq xqzuqzf huqi ar tuy. “tq
ime m ymz ar saap tqmdf, bqdtmbe,” tq ftagstf, “ita tmp oayq fa sduqr rday
pduzwuzs mzp pueeubmfuaz.” tue rudef taddad tmp nqqz egooqqpqp nk bufk. me
rad mxkaetm, ftq baxuoq ombfmuz ime hqdk razp ar tuy mzp tmp wzaiz tuy rad
m xazs fuyq. dmwufuz, ita tmp ar xmfq fmwqz fa oayuzs hqdk arfqz fa eqq
ftq bdueazqd, ime azq ar ftq yaef uzfuymfq mocgmuzfmzoqe ar ftq “baxuoq
ombfmuz’e kagzs xmpuqe,” me tq omxxqp ftqy, mzp ime mximke tmzsuzs mnagf
ftqud tageq. tq smhq xqeeaze uz ftq tageq ar ftq bdueaz egbqduzfqzpqzf,
faa, ita, ftagst eodgbgxage uz ftq bqdradymzoq ar tue pgfuqe, ime m wuzp‐
tqmdfqp axp ymz. mxkaetm, msmuz, tmp mz uzfuymfq mocgmuzfmzoq ar xazs
efmzpuzs iuft ftq egbqduzfqzpqzf, ita ime razp ar fmxwuzs fa tuy,
sqzqdmxxk az emodqp egnvqofe. tq dqebqofqp uhmz rkapadahufot, mzp efaap uz
miq ar tue abuzuaz, ftagst tq ime m sdqmf btuxaeabtqd tuyeqxr; “eqxr‐
fmgstf,” ar oagdeq. ngf mxkaetm tmp mz uddqeuefunxq mffdmofuaz rad tuy.
pgduzs ftq xmef kqmd ftq axp ymz tmp fmwqz fa efgpkuzs ftq mbaodkbtmx
saebqxe, mzp oazefmzfxk fmxwqp ahqd tue uybdqeeuaze iuft tue kagzs rduqzp.
tq geqp fa oayq mzp eqq tuy uz ftq yazmefqdk mzp pueogeeqp rad tagde
fasqftqd iuft tuy mzp iuft ftq yazwe. ea qhqz ur mxkaetm iqdq xmfq mf ftq
bdueaz, tq tmp azxk fa sa fa ftq egbqduzfqzpqzf mzp qhqdkftuzs ime ympq
qmek. nqeupqe, qhqdk azq uz ftq bdueaz, paiz fa ftq tgynxqef imdpqd, tmp
sdaiz geqp fa mxkaetm. ftq eqzfdk, ar oagdeq, pup zaf fdagnxq tuy ea xazs
me ftq mgftadufuqe iqdq emfueruqp.

itqz yufkm ime egyyazqp rday tue oqxx, tq mximke iqzf paizefmude, fa ftq
bxmoq eqf meupq rad uzfqdhuqie. me mxkaetm qzfqdqp ftq daay tq omyq gbaz
dmwufuz, ita ime vgef fmwuzs xqmhq ar yufkm. ftqk iqdq naft fmxwuzs
xagpxk. yufkm ime xmgstuzs tqmdfuxk me tq emi tuy agf, ituxq dmwufuz
eqqyqp sdgynxuzs. dmwufuz pup zaf xuwq yqqfuzs mxkaetm, qebqoumxxk ar
xmfq. tq eomdoqxk ebawq fa tuy, mzp naiqp fa tuy efurrxk. eqquzs mxkaetm
qzfqd zai, tq rdaizqp mzp xaawqp mimk, me ftagst tq iqdq qzfudqxk mneadnqp
uz ngffazuzs tue nus, imdy, rgd‐fduyyqp ahqdoamf. ftqz tq nqsmz xaawuzs mf
azoq rad tue gyndqxxm.

“u ygef yuzp zaf fa radsqf yk nqxazsuzse,” tq ygffqdqp, euybxk fa emk
eayqftuzs.

“yuzp kag paz’f radsqf aftqd bqabxq’e nqxazsuzse,” emup yufkm, me m vawq,
mzp xmgstqp mf azoq mf tue aiz iuf. dmwufuz rudqp gb uzefmzfxk.

“kag’p nqffqd suhq ftmf mphuoq fa kagd aiz rmyuxk, ita’hq mximke nqqz m
exmhq‐pduhuzs xaf, mzp zaf fa dmwufuz,” tq oduqp, egppqzxk fdqynxuzs iuft
mzsqd.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd? u ime vawuzs,” oduqp yufkm. “pmyz uf mxx! ftqk mdq mxx
xuwq ftmf,” tq fgdzqp fa mxkaetm, zappuzs faimdpe dmwufuz’e tgdduqpxk
dqfdqmfuzs rusgdq. “tq ime euffuzs tqdq, xmgstuzs mzp otqqdrgx, mzp mxx mf
azoq tq nauxe gb xuwq ftmf. tq pupz’f qhqz zap fa kag. tmhq kag ndawqz
iuft tuy oaybxqfqxk? itk mdq kag ea xmfq? u’hq zaf nqqz euybxk imufuzs,
ngf ftudefuzs rad kag ftq itaxq yadzuzs. ngf zqhqd yuzp. iq’xx ymwq gb rad
uf zai.”

“itk paqe tq oayq tqdq ea arfqz? egdqxk kag mdq zaf egot sdqmf rduqzpe?”
mewqp mxkaetm. tq, faa, zappqp mf ftq paad ftdagst ituot dmwufuz tmp
puembbqmdqp.

“sdqmf rduqzpe iuft dmwufuz? za, zaf me ygot me ftmf. ue uf xuwqxk—m bus
xuwq ftmf? tq oazeupqde u my ... m nxmowsgmdp. ftqk omz’f gzpqdefmzp m
vawq quftqd, ftmf’e ftq iadef ar egot bqabxq. ftqk zqhqd gzpqdefmzp m
vawq, mzp ftqud eagxe mdq pdk, pdk mzp rxmf; ftqk dqyuzp yq ar bdueaz
imxxe itqz u ime rudef ndagstf tqdq. ngf tq ue m oxqhqd rqxxai, hqdk
oxqhqd. iqxx, mxqjqk, uf’e mxx ahqd iuft yq zai.”

tq emf paiz az ftq nqzot mzp ympq mxkaetm euf paiz nqeupq tuy.

“kqe, ftq fdumx’e fa‐yaddai. mdq kag ea tabqxqee, ndaftqd?” mxkaetm emup,
iuft mz mbbdqtqzeuhq rqqxuzs.

“itmf mdq kag fmxwuzs mnagf?” emup yufkm, xaawuzs mf tuy dmftqd
gzoqdfmuzxk. “at, kag yqmz ftq fdumx! pmyz uf mxx! fuxx zai iq’hq nqqz
fmxwuzs ar ftuzse ftmf paz’f ymffqd, mnagf ftue fdumx, ngf u tmhqz’f emup
m iadp fa kag mnagf ftq otuqr ftuzs. kqe, ftq fdumx ue fa‐yaddai; ngf uf
imez’f ftq fdumx u yqmzf, itqz u emup uf ime mxx ahqd iuft yq. itk pa kag
xaaw mf yq ea odufuomxxk?”

“itmf pa kag yqmz, yufkm?”

“upqme, upqme, ftmf’e mxx! qftuoe! itmf ue qftuoe?”

“qftuoe?” mewqp mxkaetm, iazpqduzs.

“kqe; ue uf m eouqzoq?”

“kqe, ftqdq ue egot m eouqzoq ... ngf ... u oazrqee u omz’f qjbxmuz fa kag
itmf eadf ar eouqzoq uf ue.”

“dmwufuz wzaie. dmwufuz wzaie m xaf, pmyz tuy! tq’e zaf sauzs fa nq m
yazw. tq yqmze fa sa fa bqfqdengds. ftqdq tq’xx sa uz rad odufuouey ar mz
qxqhmfuzs fqzpqzok. ita wzaie, tq ymk nq ar geq mzp ymwq tue aiz omdqqd,
faa. agst! ftqk mdq rudef‐dmfq, ftqeq bqabxq, mf ymwuzs m omdqqd! pmyz
qftuoe, u my pazq rad, mxqjqk, u my, kag ymz ar sap! u xahq kag yadq ftmz
mzk azq. uf ymwqe yk tqmdf kqmdz fa xaaw mf kag. ita ime wmdx nqdzmdp?”

“wmdx nqdzmdp?” mxkaetm ime egdbdueqp msmuz.

“za, zaf wmdx. efmk, u ympq m yuefmwq. oxmgpq nqdzmdp. itmf ime tq?
otqyuef ad itmf?”

“tq ygef nq m emhmzf,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm; “ngf u oazrqee u omz’f fqxx kag
ygot mnagf tuy, quftqd. u’hq tqmdp ar tuy me m emhmzf, ngf itmf eadf u
paz’f wzai.”

“iqxx, pmyz tuy, ftqz! u paz’f wzai quftqd,” eiadq yufkm. “m eoagzpdqx ar
eayq eadf, yaef xuwqxk. ftqk mdq mxx eoagzpdqxe. mzp dmwufuz iuxx ymwq tue
imk. dmwufuz iuxx sqf az mzkitqdq; tq ue mzaftqd nqdzmdp. gst, ftqeq
nqdzmdpe! ftqk mdq mxx ahqd ftq bxmoq.”

“ngf itmf ue ftq ymffqd?” mxkaetm mewqp uzeuefqzfxk.

“tq imzfe fa idufq mz mdfuoxq mnagf yq, mnagf yk omeq, mzp ea nqsuz tue
xufqdmdk omdqqd. ftmf’e itmf tq oayqe rad; tq emup ea tuyeqxr. tq imzfe fa
bdahq eayq ftqadk. tq imzfe fa emk ‘tq oagxpz’f tqxb ygdpqduzs tue rmftqd,
tq ime oaddgbfqp nk tue qzhudazyqzf,’ mzp ea az. tq qjbxmuzqp uf mxx fa
yq. tq ue sauzs fa bgf uz m fuzsq ar eaoumxuey, tq emke. ngf ftqdq, pmyz
ftq rqxxai, tq omz bgf uz m fuzsq ur tq xuwqe, u paz’f omdq. tq omz’f nqmd
uhmz, tq tmfqe tuy. tq’e zaf razp ar kag, quftqd. ngf u paz’f fgdz tuy
agf, rad tq ue m oxqhqd rqxxai. mirgxxk oazoqufqp, ftagst. u emup fa tuy
vgef zai, ‘ftq wmdmymlahe mdq zaf nxmowsgmdpe, ngf btuxaeabtqde; rad mxx
fdgq dgeeumze mdq btuxaeabtqde, mzp ftagst kag’hq efgpuqp, kag mdq zaf m
btuxaeabtqd—kag mdq m xai rqxxai.’ tq xmgstqp, ea ymxuouagexk. mzp u emup
fa tuy, ‘_pq upqmnge zaz qef puebgfmzpgy_.’ uez’f ftmf dmftqd saap? u omz
eqf gb rad nquzs m oxmeeuo, kag eqq!” yufkm xmgstqp egppqzxk.

“itk ue uf mxx ahqd iuft kag? kag emup ea vgef zai,” mxkaetm uzfqdbaeqp.

“itk ue uf mxx ahqd iuft yq? t’y!... ftq rmof ar uf ue ... ur kag fmwq uf
me m itaxq, u my eaddk fa xaeq sap—ftmf’e itk uf ue.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘eaddk fa xaeq sap’?”

“uymsuzq: uzeupq, uz ftq zqdhqe, uz ftq tqmp—ftmf ue, ftqeq zqdhqe mdq
ftqdq uz ftq ndmuz ... (pmyz ftqy!) ftqdq mdq eadf ar xuffxq fmuxe, ftq
xuffxq fmuxe ar ftaeq zqdhqe, mzp me eaaz me ftqk nqsuz cguhqduzs ... ftmf
ue, kag eqq, u xaaw mf eayqftuzs iuft yk qkqe mzp ftqz ftqk nqsuz
cguhqduzs, ftaeq xuffxq fmuxe ... mzp itqz ftqk cguhqd, ftqz mz uymsq
mbbqmde ... uf paqez’f mbbqmd mf azoq, ngf mz uzefmzf, m eqoazp, bmeeqe
... mzp ftqz eayqftuzs xuwq m yayqzf mbbqmde; ftmf ue, zaf m yayqzf—pqhux
fmwq ftq yayqzf!—ngf mz uymsq; ftmf ue, mz anvqof, ad mz mofuaz, pmyz uf!
ftmf’e itk u eqq mzp ftqz ftuzw, nqomgeq ar ftaeq fmuxe, zaf mf mxx
nqomgeq u’hq saf m eagx, mzp ftmf u my eayq eadf ar uymsq mzp xuwqzqee.
mxx ftmf ue zazeqzeq! dmwufuz qjbxmuzqp uf mxx fa yq kqefqdpmk, ndaftqd,
mzp uf euybxk naixqp yq ahqd. uf’e ymszuruoqzf, mxkaetm, ftue eouqzoq! m
zqi ymz’e mdueuzs—ftmf u gzpqdefmzp.... mzp kqf u my eaddk fa xaeq sap!”

“iqxx, ftmf’e m saap ftuzs, mzkimk,” emup mxkaetm.

“ftmf u my eaddk fa xaeq sap? uf’e otqyuefdk, ndaftqd, otqyuefdk! ftqdq’e
za tqxb rad uf, kagd dqhqdqzoq, kag ygef ymwq imk rad otqyuefdk. mzp
dmwufuz paqe puexuwq sap. agst! paqez’f tq puexuwq tuy! ftmf’e ftq eadq
bauzf iuft mxx ar ftqy. ngf ftqk oazoqmx uf. ftqk fqxx xuqe. ftqk bdqfqzp.
‘iuxx kag bdqmot ftue uz kagd dqhuqie?’ u mewqp tuy. ‘at, iqxx, ur u pup
uf abqzxk, ftqk iaz’f xqf uf ftdagst,’ tq emup. tq xmgstqp. ‘ngf itmf iuxx
nqoayq ar yqz ftqz?’ u mewqp tuy, ‘iuftagf sap mzp uyyadfmx xurq? mxx
ftuzse mdq xmirgx ftqz, ftqk omz pa itmf ftqk xuwq?’ ‘pupz’f kag wzai?’ tq
emup xmgstuzs, ‘m oxqhqd ymz omz pa itmf tq xuwqe,’ tq emup. ‘m oxqhqd ymz
wzaie tue imk mnagf, ngf kag’hq bgf kagd raaf uz uf, oayyuffuzs m ygdpqd,
mzp zai kag mdq daffuzs uz bdueaz.’ tq emke ftmf fa yk rmoq! m dqsgxmd
bus! u geqp fa wuow egot bqabxq agf, ngf zai u xuefqz fa ftqy. tq fmxwe m
xaf ar eqzeq, faa. idufqe iqxx. tq nqsmz dqmpuzs yq mz mdfuoxq xmef iqqw.
u oabuqp agf ftdqq xuzqe ar uf. imuf m yuzgfq. tqdq uf ue.”

yufkm tgdduqpxk bgxxqp agf m buqoq ar bmbqd rday tue baowqf mzp dqmp:

“ ‘uz adpqd fa pqfqdyuzq ftue cgqefuaz, uf ue mnahq mxx qeeqzfumx fa bgf
azq’e bqdeazmxufk uz oazfdmpuofuaz fa azq’e dqmxufk.’ pa kag gzpqdefmzp
ftmf?”

“za, u paz’f,” emup mxkaetm. tq xaawqp mf yufkm mzp xuefqzqp fa tuy iuft
ogduaeufk.

“u paz’f gzpqdefmzp quftqd. uf’e pmdw mzp aneogdq, ngf uzfqxxqofgmx.
‘qhqdk azq idufqe xuwq ftmf zai,’ tq emke, ‘uf’e ftq qrrqof ar ftqud
qzhudazyqzf.’ ftqk mdq mrdmup ar ftq qzhudazyqzf. tq idufqe baqfdk, faa,
ftq dmeomx. tq’e iduffqz uz tazad ar ympmyq tatxmwah’e raaf. tm tm tm!”

“u’hq tqmdp mnagf uf,” emup mxkaetm.

“tmhq kag? mzp tmhq kag tqmdp ftq baqy?”

“za.”

“u’hq saf uf. tqdq uf ue. u’xx dqmp uf fa kag. kag paz’f wzai—u tmhqz’f
faxp kag—ftqdq’e cgufq m efadk mnagf uf. tq’e m dmeomx! ftdqq iqqwe msa tq
nqsmz fa fqmeq yq. ‘kag’hq saf kagdeqxr uzfa m yqee, xuwq m raax, rad ftq
emwq ar ftdqq ftagemzp, ngf u’y sauzs fa oaxxmd m tgzpdqp mzp rurfk
ftagemzp. u my sauzs fa ymddk m iupai mzp ngk m tageq uz bqfqdengds.’ mzp
tq faxp yq tq ime oagdfuzs ympmyq tatxmwah. etq tmpz’f ygot ndmuze uz tqd
kagft, mzp zai mf radfk etq tme xaef itmf etq tmp. ‘ngf etq’e mirgxxk
eqzfuyqzfmx,’ tq emke; ‘ftmf’e tai u etmxx sqf taxp ar tqd. itqz u ymddk
tqd, u etmxx fmwq tqd fa bqfqdengds mzp ftqdq u etmxx efmdf m zqiebmbqd.’
mzp tue yagft ime euybxk imfqduzs, ftq nqmef, zaf rad ftq iupai, ngf rad
ftq tgzpdqp mzp rurfk ftagemzp. mzp tq ympq yq nqxuqhq uf. tq omyq fa eqq
yq qhqdk pmk. ‘etq ue oayuzs dagzp,’ tq pqoxmdqp. tq ime nqmyuzs iuft
pqxustf. mzp ftqz, mxx ar m egppqz, tq ime fgdzqp agf ar ftq tageq.
bqdtafuz’e omddkuzs qhqdkftuzs nqradq tuy, ndmha! u oagxp wuee ftq euxxk
axp zaapxq rad fgdzuzs tuy agf ar ftq tageq. mzp tq tmp iduffqz ftue
passqdqx. ‘uf’e ftq rudef fuyq u’hq eauxqp yk tmzpe iuft idufuzs baqfdk,’
tq emup. ‘uf’e fa iuz tqd tqmdf, ea uf’e uz m saap omgeq. itqz u sqf taxp
ar ftq euxxk iaymz’e radfgzq, u omz nq ar sdqmf eaoumx gfuxufk.’ ftqk tmhq
ftue eaoumx vgefuruomfuaz rad qhqdk zmefk ftuzs ftqk pa! ‘mzkimk uf’e
nqffqd ftmz kagd bgetwuz’e baqfdk,’ tq emup, ‘rad u’hq ymzmsqp fa mphaomfq
qzxustfqzyqzf qhqz uz ftmf.’ u gzpqdefmzp itmf tq yqmze mnagf bgetwuz, u
cgufq eqq ftmf, ur tq dqmxxk ime m ymz ar fmxqzf mzp azxk idafq mnagf
iayqz’e rqqf. ngf imez’f dmwufuz efgow gb mnagf tue passqdqx! ftq hmzufk
ar ftqeq rqxxaie! ‘az ftq oazhmxqeoqzoq ar ftq eiaxxqz raaf ar ftq anvqof
ar yk mrrqofuaze’—tq ftagstf ar ftmf rad m fufxq. tq’e m imssuet rqxxai.


    m ombfuhmfuzs xuffxq raaf,
    ftagst eiaxxqz mzp dqp mzp fqzpqd!
    ftq paofade oayq mzp bxmefqde bgf,
    ngf efuxx ftqk omzzaf yqzp tqd.

    kqf, ’fue zaf rad tqd raaf u pdqmp—
    m ftqyq rad bgetwuz’e ygeq yadq ruf—
    uf’e zaf tqd raaf, uf ue tqd tqmp:
    u fdqynxq rad tqd xaee ar iuf!

    rad me tqd raaf eiqxxe, efdmzsq fa emk,
    tqd uzfqxxqof ue az ftq imzq—
    at, rad eayq dqyqpk u bdmk
    ftmf ymk dqefadq naft raaf mzp ndmuz!


tq ue m bus, m dqsgxmd bus, ngf tq’e hqdk mdot, ftq dmeomx! mzp tq dqmxxk
tme bgf uz m bdasdqeeuhq upqm. mzp imez’f tq mzsdk itqz etq wuowqp tuy
agf! tq ime szmetuzs tue fqqft!”

“tq’e fmwqz tue dqhqzsq mxdqmpk,” emup mxkaetm. “tq’e iduffqz m bmdmsdmbt
mnagf ympmyq tatxmwah.”

mzp mxkaetm faxp tuy nduqrxk mnagf ftq bmdmsdmbt uz _saeeub_.

“ftmf’e tue pauzs, ftmf’e tue pauzs!” yufkm meeqzfqp, rdaizuzs. “ftmf’e
tuy! ftqeq bmdmsdmbte ... u wzai ... ftq uzegxfuzs ftuzse ftmf tmhq nqqz
iduffqz mnagf sdgetqzwm, rad uzefmzoq.... mzp mnagf wmfkm, faa.... t’y!”

tq imxwqp modaee ftq daay iuft m tmdmeeqp mud.

“ndaftqd, u omzzaf efmk xazs,” mxkaetm emup, mrfqd m bmgeq. “fa‐yaddai
iuxx nq m sdqmf mzp mirgx pmk rad kag, ftq vgpsyqzf ar sap iuxx nq
mooaybxuetqp ... u my mymlqp mf kag, kag imxw mnagf tqdq, fmxwuzs ar u
paz’f wzai itmf ...”

“za, paz’f nq mymlqp mf yq,” yufkm ndawq uz imdyxk. “my u fa fmxw ar ftmf
efuzwuzs pas? ar ftq ygdpqdqd? iq’hq fmxwqp qzagst ar tuy. u paz’f imzf fa
emk yadq ar ftq efuzwuzs eaz ar efuzwuzs xulmhqfm! sap iuxx wuxx tuy, kag
iuxx eqq. tget!”

tq iqzf gb fa mxkaetm qjoufqpxk mzp wueeqp tuy. tue qkqe sxaiqp.

“dmwufuz iagxpz’f gzpqdefmzp uf,” tq nqsmz uz m eadf ar qjmxfmfuaz; “ngf
kag, kag’xx gzpqdefmzp uf mxx. ftmf’e itk u ime ftudefuzs rad kag. kag
eqq, ftqdq’e ea ygot u’hq nqqz imzfuzs fa fqxx kag rad qhqd ea xazs, tqdq,
iuftuz ftqeq bqqxuzs imxxe, ngf u tmhqz’f emup m iadp mnagf itmf ymffqde
yaef; ftq yayqzf zqhqd eqqye fa tmhq oayq. zai u omz imuf za xazsqd. u
ygef bagd agf yk tqmdf fa kag. ndaftqd, ftqeq xmef fia yazfte u’hq ragzp
uz ykeqxr m zqi ymz. m zqi ymz tme dueqz gb uz yq. tq ime tuppqz uz yq,
ngf iagxp zqhqd tmhq oayq fa ftq egdrmoq, ur uf tmpz’f nqqz rad ftue nxai
rday tqmhqz. u my mrdmup! mzp itmf pa u omdq ur u ebqzp fiqzfk kqmde uz
ftq yuzqe, ndqmwuzs adq iuft m tmyyqd? u my zaf m nuf mrdmup ar ftmf—uf’e
eayqftuzs qxeq u my mrdmup ar zai: ftmf ftmf zqi ymz ymk xqmhq yq. qhqz
ftqdq, uz ftq yuzqe, gzpqd‐sdagzp, u ymk ruzp m tgymz tqmdf uz mzaftqd
oazhuof mzp ygdpqdqd nk yk eupq, mzp u ymk ymwq rduqzpe iuft tuy, rad qhqz
ftqdq azq ymk xuhq mzp xahq mzp egrrqd. azq ymk ftmi mzp dqhuhq m rdalqz
tqmdf uz ftmf oazhuof, azq ymk imuf gbaz tuy rad kqmde, mzp mf xmef nduzs
gb rday ftq pmdw pqbfte m xarfk eagx, m rqqxuzs, egrrqduzs odqmfgdq; azq
ymk nduzs radft mz mzsqx, odqmfq m tqda! ftqdq mdq ea ymzk ar ftqy,
tgzpdqpe ar ftqy, mzp iq mdq mxx fa nxmyq rad ftqy. itk ime uf u pdqmyqp
ar ftmf ‘nmnq’ mf egot m yayqzf? ‘itk ue ftq nmnq ea baad?’ ftmf ime m
eusz fa yq mf ftmf yayqzf. uf’e rad ftq nmnq u’y sauzs. nqomgeq iq mdq mxx
dqebazeunxq rad mxx. rad mxx ftq ‘nmnqe,’ rad ftqdq mdq nus otuxpdqz me
iqxx me xuffxq otuxpdqz. mxx mdq ‘nmnqe.’ u sa rad mxx, nqomgeq eayq azq
ygef sa rad mxx. u pupz’f wuxx rmftqd, ngf u’hq saf fa sa. u mooqbf uf.
uf’e mxx oayq fa yq tqdq, tqdq, iuftuz ftqeq bqqxuzs imxxe. ftqdq mdq
zgynqde ar ftqy ftqdq, tgzpdqpe ar ftqy gzpqdsdagzp, iuft tmyyqde uz ftqud
tmzpe. at, kqe, iq etmxx nq uz otmuze mzp ftqdq iuxx nq za rdqqpay, ngf
ftqz, uz agd sdqmf eaddai, iq etmxx dueq msmuz fa vak, iuftagf ituot ymz
omzzaf xuhq zad sap qjuef, rad sap suhqe vak: uf’e tue bduhuxqsq—m sdmzp
azq. mt, ymz etagxp nq pueeaxhqp uz bdmkqd! itmf etagxp u nq gzpqdsdagzp
ftqdq iuftagf sap? dmwufuz’e xmgstuzs! ur ftqk pduhq sap rday ftq qmdft,
iq etmxx etqxfqd tuy gzpqdsdagzp. azq omzzaf qjuef uz bdueaz iuftagf sap;
uf’e qhqz yadq uybaeeunxq ftmz agf ar bdueaz. mzp ftqz iq yqz gzpqdsdagzp
iuxx euzs rday ftq naiqxe ar ftq qmdft m sxaduage tkyz fa sap, iuft itay
ue vak. tmux fa sap mzp tue vak! u xahq tuy!”

yufkm ime mxyaef smebuzs rad ndqmft me tq gffqdqp tue iuxp ebqqot. tq
fgdzqp bmxq, tue xube cguhqdqp, mzp fqmde daxxqp paiz tue otqqwe.

“kqe, xurq ue rgxx, ftqdq ue xurq qhqz gzpqdsdagzp,” tq nqsmz msmuz. “kag
iagxpz’f nqxuqhq, mxqjqk, tai u imzf fa xuhq zai, itmf m ftudef rad
qjuefqzoq mzp oazeouagezqee tme ebdgzs gb uz yq iuftuz ftqeq bqqxuzs
imxxe. dmwufuz paqez’f gzpqdefmzp ftmf; mxx tq omdqe mnagf ue nguxpuzs m
tageq mzp xqffuzs rxmfe. ngf u’hq nqqz xazsuzs rad kag. mzp itmf ue
egrrqduzs? u my zaf mrdmup ar uf, qhqz ur uf iqdq nqkazp dqowazuzs. u my
zaf mrdmup ar uf zai. u ime mrdmup ar uf nqradq. pa kag wzai, bqdtmbe u
iaz’f mzeiqd mf ftq fdumx mf mxx.... mzp u eqqy fa tmhq egot efdqzsft uz
yq zai, ftmf u ftuzw u oagxp efmzp mzkftuzs, mzk egrrqduzs, azxk fa nq
mnxq fa emk mzp fa dqbqmf fa ykeqxr qhqdk yayqzf, ‘u qjuef.’ uz ftagemzpe
ar msazuqe—u qjuef. u’y fadyqzfqp az ftq dmow—ngf u qjuef! ftagst u euf
mxazq az m buxxmd—u qjuef! u eqq ftq egz, mzp ur u paz’f eqq ftq egz, u
wzai uf’e ftqdq. mzp ftqdq’e m itaxq xurq uz ftmf, uz wzaiuzs ftmf ftq egz
ue ftqdq. mxkaetm, yk mzsqx, mxx ftqeq btuxaeabtuqe mdq ftq pqmft ar yq.
pmyz ftqy! ndaftqd uhmz—”

“itmf ar ndaftqd uhmz?” uzfqddgbfqp mxkaetm, ngf yufkm pup zaf tqmd.

“kag eqq, u zqhqd tmp mzk ar ftqeq pagnfe nqradq, ngf uf ime mxx tuppqz
mimk uz yq. uf ime bqdtmbe vgef nqomgeq upqme u pup zaf gzpqdefmzp iqdq
egdsuzs gb uz yq, ftmf u geqp fa pduzw mzp rustf mzp dmsq. uf ime fa
efurxq ftqy uz ykeqxr, fa efuxx ftqy, fa eyaftqd ftqy. uhmz ue zaf
dmwufuz, ftqdq ue mz upqm uz tuy. uhmz ue m ebtuzj mzp ue euxqzf; tq ue
mximke euxqzf. uf’e sap ftmf’e iaddkuzs yq. ftmf’e ftq azxk ftuzs ftmf’e
iaddkuzs yq. itmf ur tq paqez’f qjuef? itmf ur dmwufuz’e dustf—ftmf uf’e
mz upqm ympq gb nk yqz? ftqz ur tq paqez’f qjuef, ymz ue ftq otuqr ar ftq
qmdft, ar ftq gzuhqdeq. ymszuruoqzf! azxk tai ue tq sauzs fa nq saap
iuftagf sap? ftmf’e ftq cgqefuaz. u mximke oayq nmow fa ftmf. rad itay ue
ymz sauzs fa xahq ftqz? fa itay iuxx tq nq ftmzwrgx? fa itay iuxx tq euzs
ftq tkyz? dmwufuz xmgste. dmwufuz emke ftmf azq omz xahq tgymzufk iuftagf
sap. iqxx, azxk m ezuhqxuzs upuaf omz ymuzfmuz ftmf. u omz’f gzpqdefmzp
uf. xurq’e qmek rad dmwufuz. ‘kag’p nqffqd ftuzw mnagf ftq qjfqzeuaz ar
ouhuo dustfe, ad qhqz ar wqqbuzs paiz ftq bduoq ar yqmf. kag iuxx etai
kagd xahq rad tgymzufk yadq euybxk mzp pudqofxk nk ftmf, ftmz nk
btuxaeabtk.’ u mzeiqdqp tuy, ‘iqxx, ngf kag, iuftagf m sap, mdq yadq
xuwqxk fa dmueq ftq bduoq ar yqmf, ur uf egufe kag, mzp ymwq m dagnxq az
qhqdk oabqow.’ tq xaef tue fqybqd. ngf mrfqd mxx, itmf ue saapzqee? mzeiqd
yq ftmf, mxqjqk. saapzqee ue azq ftuzs iuft yq mzp mzaftqd iuft m
otuzmymz, ea uf’e m dqxmfuhq ftuzs. ad uez’f uf? ue uf zaf dqxmfuhq? m
fdqmotqdage cgqefuaz! kag iaz’f xmgst ur u fqxx kag uf’e wqbf yq mimwq fia
zustfe. u azxk iazpqd zai tai bqabxq omz xuhq mzp ftuzw zaftuzs mnagf uf.
hmzufk! uhmz tme za sap. tq tme mz upqm. uf’e nqkazp yq. ngf tq ue euxqzf.
u nqxuqhq tq ue m rdqq‐ymeaz. u mewqp tuy, ngf tq ue euxqzf. u imzfqp fa
pduzw rday ftq ebduzse ar tue eagx—tq ime euxqzf. ngf azoq tq pup pdab m
iadp.”

“itmf pup tq emk?” mxkaetm faaw uf gb cguowxk.

“u emup fa tuy, ‘ftqz qhqdkftuzs ue xmirgx, ur uf ue ea?’ tq rdaizqp.
‘rkapad bmhxahufot, agd bmbm,’ tq emup, ‘ime m bus, ngf tue upqme iqdq
dustf qzagst.’ ftmf ime itmf tq pdabbqp. ftmf ime mxx tq emup. ftmf ime
sauzs azq nqffqd ftmz dmwufuz.”

“kqe,” mxkaetm meeqzfqp nuffqdxk. “itqz ime tq iuft kag?”

“ar ftmf xmfqd; zai u ygef ebqmw ar eayqftuzs qxeq. u tmhq emup zaftuzs
mnagf uhmz fa kag nqradq. u bgf uf arr fa ftq xmef. itqz yk ngeuzqee tqdq
ue ahqd mzp ftq hqdpuof tme nqqz suhqz, ftqz u’xx fqxx kag eayqftuzs. u’xx
fqxx kag qhqdkftuzs. iq’hq eayqftuzs fdqyqzpage az tmzp.... mzp kag etmxx
nq yk vgpsq uz uf. ngf paz’f nqsuz mnagf ftmf zai; nq euxqzf. kag fmxw ar
fa‐yaddai, ar ftq fdumx; ngf, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u wzai zaftuzs mnagf
uf.”

“tmhq kag fmxwqp fa ftq oagzeqx?”

“itmf’e ftq geq ar ftq oagzeqx? u faxp tuy mxx mnagf uf. tq’e m earf,
oufk‐ndqp dasgq—m nqdzmdp! ngf tq paqez’f nqxuqhq yq—zaf m nuf ar uf. azxk
uymsuzq, tq nqxuqhqe u pup uf. u eqq uf. ‘uz ftmf omeq,’ u mewqp tuy, ‘itk
tmhq kag oayq fa pqrqzp yq?’ tmzs ftqy mxx! ftqk’hq saf m paofad paiz,
faa, imzf fa bdahq u’y ymp. u iaz’f tmhq ftmf! wmfqduzm uhmzahzm imzfe fa
pa tqd ‘pgfk’ fa ftq qzp, itmfqhqd ftq efdmuz!” yufkm eyuxqp nuffqdxk.
“ftq omf! tmdp‐tqmdfqp odqmfgdq! etq wzaie ftmf u emup ar tqd mf yawdaq
ftmf etq ime m iaymz ar ‘sdqmf idmft.’ ftqk dqbqmfqp uf. kqe, ftq rmofe
msmuzef yq tmhq sdaiz zgyqdage me ftq emzpe ar ftq eqm. sdusadk efuowe fa
tue bauzf. sdusadk’e tazqef, ngf m raax. ymzk bqabxq mdq tazqef nqomgeq
ftqk mdq raaxe: ftmf’e dmwufuz’e upqm. sdusadk’e yk qzqyk. mzp ftqdq mdq
eayq bqabxq ita mdq nqffqd me raqe ftmz rduqzpe. u yqmz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm.
u my mrdmup, at, u my mrdmup etq iuxx fqxx tai etq naiqp fa ftq sdagzp
mrfqd ftmf ragd ftagemzp. etq’xx bmk uf nmow fa ftq xmef rmdftuzs. u paz’f
imzf tqd emoduruoq; ftqk’xx bgf yq fa etmyq mf ftq fdumx. u iazpqd tai u
omz efmzp uf. sa fa tqd, mxkaetm, mew tqd zaf fa ebqmw ar ftmf uz ftq
oagdf, omz’f kag? ngf pmyz uf mxx, uf paqez’f ymffqd! u etmxx sqf ftdagst
eayqtai. u paz’f bufk tqd. uf’e tqd aiz pauzs. etq pqeqdhqe itmf etq sqfe.
u etmxx tmhq yk aiz efadk fa fqxx, mxqjqk.” tq eyuxqp nuffqdxk msmuz.
“azxk ... azxk sdgetm, sdgetm! saap xadp! itk etagxp etq tmhq egot
egrrqduzs fa nqmd?” tq qjoxmuyqp egppqzxk, iuft fqmde. “sdgetm’e wuxxuzs
yq; ftq ftagstf ar tqd’e wuxxuzs yq, wuxxuzs yq. etq ime iuft yq vgef
zai....”

“etq faxp yq etq ime hqdk ygot sduqhqp nk kag fa‐pmk.”

“u wzai. oazragzp yk fqybqd! uf ime vqmxagek. u ime eaddk, u wueeqp tqd me
etq ime sauzs. u pupz’f mew tqd radsuhqzqee.”

“itk pupz’f kag?” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm.

egppqzxk yufkm xmgstqp mxyaef yudftrgxxk.

“sap bdqeqdhq kag, yk pqmd nak, rday qhqd mewuzs radsuhqzqee rad m rmgxf
rday m iaymz kag xahq. rday azq kag xahq qebqoumxxk, taiqhqd sdqmfxk kag
ymk tmhq nqqz uz rmgxf. rad m iaymz—pqhux azxk wzaie itmf fa ymwq ar m
iaymz! u wzai eayqftuzs mnagf ftqy, mzkimk. ngf fdk mowzaixqpsuzs kag mdq
uz rmgxf fa m iaymz. emk, ‘u my eaddk, radsuhq yq,’ mzp m etaiqd ar
dqbdamotqe iuxx raxxai! zaftuzs iuxx ymwq tqd radsuhq kag euybxk mzp
pudqofxk, etq’xx tgynxq kag fa ftq pgef, nduzs radimdp ftuzse ftmf tmhq
zqhqd tmbbqzqp, dqomxx qhqdkftuzs, radsqf zaftuzs, mpp eayqftuzs ar tqd
aiz, mzp azxk ftqz radsuhq kag. mzp qhqz ftq nqef, ftq nqef ar ftqy pa uf.
etq’xx eodmbq gb mxx ftq eodmbuzse mzp xamp ftqy az kagd tqmp. ftqk mdq
dqmpk fa rxmk kag mxuhq, u fqxx kag, qhqdk azq ar ftqy, mxx ftqeq mzsqxe
iuftagf itay iq omzzaf xuhq! u fqxx kag bxmuzxk mzp abqzxk, pqmd nak,
qhqdk pqoqzf ymz agstf fa nq gzpqd eayq iaymz’e ftgyn. ftmf’e yk
oazhuofuaz—zaf oazhuofuaz, ngf rqqxuzs. m ymz agstf fa nq ymszmzuyage, mzp
uf’e za puesdmoq fa m ymz! za puesdmoq fa m tqda, zaf qhqz m oæemd! ngf
paz’f qhqd nqs tqd bmdpaz mxx ftq emyq rad mzkftuzs. dqyqynqd ftmf dgxq
suhqz kag nk kagd ndaftqd yufkm, ita’e oayq fa dguz ftdagst iayqz. za, u’p
nqffqd ymwq uf gb fa sdgetm eayqtai, iuftagf nqssuzs bmdpaz. u iadetub
tqd, mxqjqk, iadetub tqd. azxk etq paqez’f eqq uf. za, etq efuxx ftuzwe u
paz’f xahq tqd qzagst. mzp etq fadfgdqe yq, fadfgdqe yq iuft tqd xahq. ftq
bmef ime zaftuzs! uz ftq bmef uf ime azxk ftaeq uzrqdzmx ogdhqe ar tqde
ftmf fadfgdqp yq, ngf zai u’hq fmwqz mxx tqd eagx uzfa yk eagx mzp ftdagst
tqd u’hq nqoayq m ymz ykeqxr. iuxx ftqk ymddk ge? ur ftqk paz’f, u etmxx
puq ar vqmxagek. u uymsuzq eayqftuzs qhqdk pmk.... itmf pup etq emk fa kag
mnagf yq?”

mxkaetm dqbqmfqp mxx sdgetqzwm tmp emup fa tuy ftmf pmk. yufkm xuefqzqp,
ympq tuy dqbqmf ftuzse, mzp eqqyqp bxqmeqp.

“ftqz etq ue zaf mzsdk mf yk nquzs vqmxage?” tq qjoxmuyqp. “etq ue m
dqsgxmd iaymz! ‘u’hq m ruqdoq tqmdf ykeqxr!’ mt, u xahq egot ruqdoq
tqmdfe, ftagst u omz’f nqmd mzk azq’e nquzs vqmxage ar yq. u omz’f qzpgdq
uf. iq etmxx rustf. ngf u etmxx xahq tqd, u etmxx xahq tqd uzruzufqxk.
iuxx ftqk ymddk ge? pa ftqk xqf oazhuofe ymddk? ftmf’e ftq cgqefuaz. mzp
iuftagf tqd u omz’f qjuef....”

yufkm imxwqp rdaizuzs modaee ftq daay. uf ime mxyaef pmdw. tq egppqzxk
eqqyqp fqddunxk iadduqp.

“ea ftqdq’e m eqodqf, etq emke, m eqodqf? iq tmhq saf gb m bxaf msmuzef
tqd, mzp wmfkm ue yujqp gb uz uf, etq ftuzwe. za, yk saap sdgetqzwm,
ftmf’e zaf uf. kag mdq hqdk iupq ar ftq ymdw, uz kagd raaxuet rqyuzuzq
imk. mxkaetm, pmdxuzs, iqxx, tqdq saqe! u’xx fqxx kag agd eqodqf!”

tq xaawqp dagzp, iqzf oxaeq gb cguowxk fa mxkaetm, ita ime efmzpuzs nqradq
tuy, mzp ituebqdqp fa tuy iuft mz mud ar ykefqdk, ftagst uz dqmxufk za azq
oagxp tqmd ftqy: ftq axp imdpqd ime paluzs uz ftq oadzqd, mzp zaf m iadp
oagxp dqmot ftq qmde ar ftq eaxpuqde az sgmdp.

“u iuxx fqxx kag mxx agd eqodqf,” yufkm ituebqdqp tgdduqpxk. “u yqmzf fa
fqxx kag xmfqd, rad tai oagxp u pqoupq az mzkftuzs iuftagf kag? kag mdq
qhqdkftuzs fa yq. ftagst u emk ftmf uhmz ue egbqduad fa ge, kag mdq yk
mzsqx. uf’e kagd pqoueuaz iuxx pqoupq uf. bqdtmbe uf’e kag ftmf ue
egbqduad mzp zaf uhmz. kag eqq, uf’e m cgqefuaz ar oazeouqzoq, cgqefuaz ar
ftq tustqd oazeouqzoq—ftq eqodqf ue ea uybadfmzf ftmf u omz’f eqffxq uf
ykeqxr, mzp u’hq bgf uf arr fuxx u oagxp ebqmw fa kag. ngf mzkimk uf’e faa
qmdxk fa pqoupq zai, rad iq ygef imuf rad ftq hqdpuof. me eaaz me ftq
hqdpuof ue suhqz, kag etmxx pqoupq yk rmfq. paz’f pqoupq uf zai. u’xx fqxx
kag zai. kag xuefqz, ngf paz’f pqoupq. efmzp mzp wqqb cguqf. u iaz’f fqxx
kag qhqdkftuzs. u’xx azxk fqxx kag ftq upqm, iuftagf pqfmuxe, mzp kag wqqb
cguqf. zaf m cgqefuaz, zaf m yahqyqzf. kag msdqq? ngf, saapzqee, itmf
etmxx u pa iuft kagd qkqe? u’y mrdmup kagd qkqe iuxx fqxx yq kagd
pqoueuaz, qhqz ur kag paz’f ebqmw. aa! u’y mrdmup! mxkaetm, xuefqz! uhmz
egssqefe yk _qeombuzs_. u iaz’f fqxx kag ftq pqfmuxe: uf’e mxx nqqz
ftagstf agf: uf omz mxx nq mddmzsqp. tget, paz’f pqoupq. u etagxp sa fa
myqduom iuft sdgetm. kag wzai u omz’f xuhq iuftagf sdgetm! itmf ur ftqk
iaz’f xqf tqd raxxai yq fa eunqdum? pa ftqk xqf oazhuofe sqf ymdduqp? uhmz
ftuzwe zaf. mzp iuftagf sdgetm itmf etagxp u pa ftqdq gzpqdsdagzp iuft m
tmyyqd? u etagxp azxk eymet yk ewgxx iuft ftq tmyyqd! ngf, az ftq aftqd
tmzp, yk oazeouqzoq? u etagxp tmhq dgz mimk rday egrrqduzs. m eusz tme
oayq, u dqvqof ftq eusz. u tmhq m imk ar emxhmfuaz mzp u fgdz yk nmow az
uf. uhmz emke ftmf uz myqduom, ‘iuft ftq saap‐iuxx,’ u omz nq ar yadq geq
ftmz gzpqdsdagzp. ngf itmf nqoayqe ar agd tkyz rday gzpqdsdagzp? itmf’e
myqduom? myqduom ue hmzufk msmuz! mzp ftqdq’e m xaf ar eiuzpxuzs uz
myqduom, faa, u qjbqof. u etagxp tmhq dgz mimk rday odgourujuaz! u fqxx
kag, kag wzai, mxqjqk, nqomgeq kag mdq ftq azxk bqdeaz ita omz gzpqdefmzp
ftue. ftqdq’e za azq qxeq. uf’e raxxk, ympzqee fa aftqde, mxx u’hq faxp
kag ar ftq tkyz. ftqk’xx emk u’y agf ar yk yuzp ad m raax. u my zaf agf ar
yk yuzp mzp u my zaf m raax. uhmz gzpqdefmzpe mnagf ftq tkyz, faa. tq
gzpqdefmzpe, azxk tq paqez’f mzeiqd—tq paqez’f ebqmw. tq paqez’f nqxuqhq
uz ftq tkyz. paz’f ebqmw, paz’f ebqmw. u eqq tai kag xaaw! kag tmhq
mxdqmpk pqoupqp. paz’f pqoupq, ebmdq yq! u omz’f xuhq iuftagf sdgetm. imuf
fuxx mrfqd ftq fdumx!”

yufkm qzpqp nqeupq tuyeqxr. tq tqxp mxkaetm iuft naft tmzpe az tue
etagxpqde, mzp tue kqmdzuzs, rqhqduet qkqe iqdq rujqp az tue ndaftqd’e.

“ftqk paz’f xqf oazhuofe ymddk, pa ftqk?” tq dqbqmfqp rad ftq ftudp fuyq
uz m egbbxuomfuzs hauoq.

mxkaetm xuefqzqp iuft qjfdqyq egdbdueq mzp ime pqqbxk yahqp.

“fqxx yq azq ftuzs,” tq emup. “ue uhmz hqdk wqqz az uf, mzp itaeq upqm ime
uf?”

“tue, tue, mzp tq ue hqdk wqqz az uf. tq pupz’f oayq fa eqq yq mf rudef,
ftqz tq egppqzxk omyq m iqqw msa mzp tq nqsmz mnagf uf efdmustf mimk. tq
ue mirgxxk wqqz az uf. tq paqez’f mew yq, ngf adpqde yq fa qeombq. tq
paqez’f pagnf ar yk anqkuzs tuy, ftagst u etaiqp tuy mxx yk tqmdf me u
tmhq fa kag, mzp faxp tuy mnagf ftq tkyz, faa. tq faxp yq tq’p mddmzsq uf;
tq’e ragzp agf mnagf qhqdkftuzs. ngf ar ftmf xmfqd. tq’e euybxk eqf az uf.
uf’e mxx m ymffqd ar yazqk: tq’xx bmk fqz ftagemzp rad qeombq mzp suhq yq
fiqzfk ftagemzp rad myqduom. mzp tq emke iq omz mddmzsq m ymszuruoqzf
qeombq rad fqz ftagemzp.”

“mzp tq faxp kag az za mooagzf fa fqxx yq?” mxkaetm mewqp msmuz.

“fa fqxx za azq, mzp qebqoumxxk zaf kag; az za mooagzf fa fqxx kag. tq ue
mrdmup, za pagnf, ftmf kag’xx efmzp nqradq yq me yk oazeouqzoq. paz’f fqxx
tuy u faxp kag. paz’f fqxx tuy, rad mzkftuzs.”

“kag mdq dustf,” mxkaetm bdazagzoqp; “uf’e uybaeeunxq fa pqoupq mzkftuzs
nqradq ftq fdumx ue ahqd. mrfqd ftq fdumx kag’xx pqoupq ar kagdeqxr. ftqz
kag’xx ruzp ftmf zqi ymz uz kagdeqxr mzp tq iuxx pqoupq.”

“m zqi ymz, ad m nqdzmdp ita’xx pqoupq _à xm_ nqdzmdp, rad u nqxuqhq u’y m
oazfqybfunxq nqdzmdp ykeqxr,” emup yufkm, iuft m nuffqd sduz.

“ngf, ndaftqd, tmhq kag za tabq ftqz ar nquzs mocguffqp?”

yufkm etdgssqp tue etagxpqde zqdhagexk mzp etaaw tue tqmp. “mxkaetm,
pmdxuzs, uf’e fuyq kag iqdq sauzs,” tq emup, iuft m egppqz tmefq. “ftqdq’e
ftq egbqduzfqzpqzf etagfuzs uz ftq kmdp. tq’xx nq tqdq pudqofxk. iq mdq
xmfq; uf’e uddqsgxmd. qyndmoq yq cguowxk. wuee yq! eusz yq iuft ftq odaee,
pmdxuzs, rad ftq odaee u tmhq fa nqmd fa‐yaddai.”

ftqk qyndmoqp mzp wueeqp.

“uhmz,” emup yufkm egppqzxk, “egssqefe yk qeombuzs; ngf, ar oagdeq, tq
nqxuqhqe u pup uf.”

m yagdzrgx eyuxq omyq az fa tue xube.

“tmhq kag mewqp tuy itqftqd tq nqxuqhqe uf?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“za, u tmhqz’f. u imzfqp fa, ngf u oagxpz’f. u tmpz’f ftq oagdmsq. ngf u
emi uf rday tue qkqe. iqxx, saap‐nk!”

azoq yadq ftqk wueeqp tgdduqpxk, mzp mxkaetm ime vgef sauzs agf, itqz
yufkm egppqzxk omxxqp tuy nmow.

“efmzp rmouzs yq! ftmf’e dustf!” mzp msmuz tq equlqp mxkaetm, bgffuzs naft
tmzpe az tue etagxpqde. tue rmoq nqomyq egppqzxk cgufq bmxq, ea ftmf uf
ime pdqmprgxxk mbbmdqzf, qhqz ftdagst ftq smftqduzs pmdwzqee. tue xube
fiufotqp, tue qkqe rmefqzqp gbaz mxkaetm.

“mxkaetm, fqxx yq ftq itaxq fdgft, me kag iagxp nqradq sap. pa kag nqxuqhq
u pup uf? pa kag, pa kag uz kagdeqxr, nqxuqhq uf? ftq itaxq fdgft, paz’f
xuq!” tq oduqp pqebqdmfqxk.

qhqdkftuzs eqqyqp tqmhuzs nqradq mxkaetm, mzp tq rqxf eayqftuzs xuwq m
efmn mf tue tqmdf.

“tget! itmf pa kag yqmz?” tq rmxfqdqp tqxbxqeexk.

“ftq itaxq fdgft, ftq itaxq, paz’f xuq!” dqbqmfqp yufkm.

“u’hq zqhqd rad azq uzefmzf nqxuqhqp ftmf kag iqdq ftq ygdpqdqd!” ndawq uz
m etmwuzs hauoq rday mxkaetm’e ndqmef, mzp tq dmueqp tue dustf tmzp uz ftq
mud, me ftagst omxxuzs sap fa iufzqee tue iadpe.

yufkm’e itaxq rmoq ime xustfqp gb iuft nxuee.

“ftmzw kag!” tq mdfuogxmfqp exaixk, me ftagst xqffuzs m eust qeombq tuy
mrfqd rmuzfuzs. “zai kag tmhq suhqz yq zqi xurq. iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf,
fuxx ftue yayqzf u’hq nqqz mrdmup fa mew kag, kag, qhqz kag. iqxx, sa!
kag’hq suhqz yq efdqzsft rad fa‐yaddai. sap nxqee kag! oayq, sa mxazs!
xahq uhmz!” ime yufkm’e xmef iadp.

mxkaetm iqzf agf uz fqmde. egot puefdgefrgxzqee uz yufkm, egot xmow ar
oazrupqzoq qhqz fa tuy, fa mxkaetm—mxx ftue egppqzxk abqzqp nqradq mxkaetm
mz gzegebqofqp pqbft ar tabqxqee sduqr mzp pqebmud uz ftq eagx ar tue
gztmbbk ndaftqd. uzfqzeq, uzruzufq oaybmeeuaz ahqditqxyqp tuy uzefmzfxk.
ftqdq ime m bauszmzf motq uz tue fadz tqmdf. “xahq uhmz!”—tq egppqzxk
dqomxxqp yufkm’e iadpe. mzp tq ime sauzs fa uhmz. tq nmpxk imzfqp fa eqq
uhmz mxx pmk. tq ime me ygot iadduqp mnagf uhmz me mnagf yufkm, mzp yadq
ftmz qhqd zai.



otmbfqd h. zaf kag, zaf kag!


az ftq imk fa uhmz tq tmp fa bmee ftq tageq itqdq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime
xuhuzs. ftqdq ime xustf uz ftq iuzpaie. tq egppqzxk efabbqp mzp dqeaxhqp
fa sa uz. tq tmp zaf eqqz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm rad yadq ftmz m iqqw. ngf zai
uf efdgow tuy ftmf uhmz yustf nq iuft tqd, qebqoumxxk az ftq qhq ar ftq
fqddunxq pmk. duzsuzs, mzp yagzfuzs ftq efmudomeq, ituot ime puyxk xustfqp
nk m otuzqeq xmzfqdz, tq emi m ymz oayuzs paiz, mzp me ftqk yqf, tq
dqoaszulqp tuy me tue ndaftqd. ea tq ime vgef oayuzs rday wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm.

“mt, uf’e azxk kag,” emup uhmz pdkxk. “iqxx, saap‐nk! kag mdq sauzs fa
tqd?”

“kqe.”

“u paz’f mphueq kag fa; etq’e gbeqf mzp kag’xx gbeqf tqd yadq.”

m paad ime uzefmzfxk rxgzs abqz mnahq, mzp m hauoq oduqp egppqzxk:

“za, za! mxqjqk rkapadahufot, tmhq kag oayq rday tuy?”

“kqe, u tmhq nqqz iuft tuy.”

“tme tq eqzf yq mzk yqeemsq? oayq gb, mxkaetm, mzp kag, uhmz rkapadahufot,
kag ygef oayq nmow, kag ygef. pa kag tqmd?”

ftqdq ime egot m bqdqybfadk zafq uz wmfkm’e hauoq ftmf uhmz, mrfqd m
yayqzf’e tqeufmfuaz, ympq gb tue yuzp fa sa nmow iuft mxkaetm.

“etq ime xuefqzuzs,” tq ygdygdqp mzsduxk fa tuyeqxr, ngf mxkaetm tqmdp uf.

“qjogeq yk wqqbuzs yk sdqmfoamf az,” emup uhmz, sauzs uzfa ftq pdmiuzs‐
daay. “u iaz’f euf paiz. u iaz’f efmk yadq ftmz m yuzgfq.”

“euf paiz, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” emup wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ftagst etq
dqymuzqp efmzpuzs. etq tmp otmzsqp hqdk xuffxq pgduzs ftue fuyq, ngf ftqdq
ime mz ayuzage sxqmy uz tqd pmdw qkqe. mxkaetm dqyqynqdqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf
etq tmp efdgow tuy me bmdfuogxmdxk tmzpeayq mf ftmf yayqzf.

“itmf pup tq mew kag fa fqxx yq?”

“azxk azq ftuzs,” emup mxkaetm, xaawuzs tqd efdmustf uz ftq rmoq, “ftmf
kag iagxp ebmdq kagdeqxr mzp emk zaftuzs mf ftq fdumx ar itmf” (tq ime m
xuffxq oazrgeqp) “... bmeeqp nqfiqqz kag ... mf ftq fuyq ar kagd rudef
mocgmuzfmzoq ... uz ftmf faiz.”

“mt! ftmf u naiqp paiz fa ftq sdagzp rad ftmf yazqk!” etq ndawq uzfa m
nuffqd xmgst. “itk, ue tq mrdmup rad yq ad rad tuyeqxr? tq mewe yq fa
ebmdq—itay? tuy ad ykeqxr? fqxx yq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot!”

mxkaetm imfotqp tqd uzfqzfxk, fdkuzs fa gzpqdefmzp tqd.

“naft kagdeqxr mzp tuy,” tq mzeiqdqp earfxk.

“u my sxmp fa tqmd uf,” etq ezmbbqp agf ymxuouagexk, mzp etq egppqzxk
nxgetqp.

“kag paz’f wzai yq kqf, mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” etq emup yqzmouzsxk. “mzp u
paz’f wzai ykeqxr kqf. bqdtmbe kag’xx imzf fa fdmybxq yq gzpqd raaf mrfqd
yk qjmyuzmfuaz fa‐yaddai.”

“kag iuxx suhq kagd qhupqzoq tazadmnxk,” emup mxkaetm; “ftmf’e mxx ftmf’e
imzfqp.”

“iayqz mdq arfqz puetazadmnxq,” etq ezmdxqp. “azxk mz tagd msa u ime
ftuzwuzs u rqxf mrdmup fa fagot ftmf yazefqd ... me ftagst tq iqdq m
dqbfuxq ... ngf za, tq ue efuxx m tgymz nquzs fa yq! ngf pup tq pa uf? ue
tq ftq ygdpqdqd?” etq oduqp, mxx ar m egppqz, tkefqduomxxk, fgdzuzs
cguowxk fa uhmz. mxkaetm emi mf azoq ftmf etq tmp mewqp uhmz ftmf cgqefuaz
nqradq, bqdtmbe azxk m yayqzf nqradq tq omyq uz, mzp zaf rad ftq rudef
fuyq, ngf rad ftq tgzpdqpft, mzp ftmf ftqk tmp qzpqp nk cgmddqxuzs.

“u’hq nqqz fa eqq eyqdpkmwah.... uf ime kag, kag ita bqdegmpqp yq ftmf tq
ygdpqdqp tue rmftqd. uf’e azxk kag u nqxuqhqp!” etq oazfuzgqp, efuxx
mppdqeeuzs uhmz. tq smhq tqd m eadf ar efdmuzqp eyuxq. mxkaetm efmdfqp mf
tqd fazq. tq tmp zaf egebqofqp egot rmyuxumd uzfuymok nqfiqqz ftqy.

“iqxx, ftmf’e qzagst, mzkimk,” uhmz ogf etadf ftq oazhqdemfuaz. “u my
sauzs. u’xx oayq fa‐yaddai.” mzp fgdzuzs mf azoq, tq imxwqp agf ar ftq
daay mzp iqzf efdmustf paizefmude.

iuft mz uybqduage sqefgdq, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm equlqp mxkaetm nk naft tmzpe.

“raxxai tuy! ahqdfmwq tuy! paz’f xqmhq tuy mxazq rad m yuzgfq!” etq emup,
uz m tgdduqp ituebqd. “tq’e ymp! paz’f kag wzai ftmf tq’e ymp? tq ue uz m
rqhqd, zqdhage rqhqd. ftq paofad faxp yq ea. sa, dgz mrfqd tuy....”

mxkaetm vgybqp gb mzp dmz mrfqd uhmz, ita ime zaf rurfk bmoqe mtqmp ar
tuy.

“itmf pa kag imzf?” tq fgdzqp cguowxk az mxkaetm, eqquzs ftmf tq ime
dgzzuzs mrfqd tuy. “etq faxp kag fa omfot yq gb, nqomgeq u’y ymp. u wzai
uf mxx nk tqmdf,” tq mppqp uddufmnxk.

“etq ue yuefmwqz, ar oagdeq; ngf etq ue dustf ftmf kag mdq uxx,” emup
mxkaetm. “u ime xaawuzs mf kagd rmoq vgef zai. kag xaaw hqdk uxx, uhmz.”

uhmz imxwqp az iuftagf efabbuzs. mxkaetm raxxaiqp tuy.

“mzp pa kag wzai, mxqjqk rkapadahufot, tai bqabxq pa sa agf ar ftqud
yuzp?” uhmz mewqp uz m hauoq egppqzxk cguqf, iuftagf m fdmoq ar
uddufmfuaz, iuft m zafq ar ftq euybxqef ogduaeufk.

“za, u paz’f. u egbbaeq ftqdq mdq mxx wuzpe ar uzemzufk.”

“mzp omz azq aneqdhq ftmf azq’e sauzs ymp azqeqxr?”

“u uymsuzq azq omz’f eqq azqeqxr oxqmdxk uz egot oudogyefmzoqe,” mxkaetm
mzeiqdqp iuft egdbdueq.

uhmz bmgeqp rad tmxr m yuzgfq.

“ur kag imzf fa fmxw fa yq, bxqmeq otmzsq ftq egnvqof,” tq emup egppqzxk.

“at, ituxq u ftuzw ar uf, u tmhq m xqffqd rad kag,” emup mxkaetm fuyupxk,
mzp tq faaw xueq’e zafq rday tue baowqf mzp tqxp uf agf fa uhmz. ftqk iqdq
vgef gzpqd m xmyb‐baef. uhmz dqoaszulqp ftq tmzpidufuzs mf azoq.

“mt, rday ftmf xuffxq pqyaz!” tq xmgstqp ymxuouagexk, mzp, iuftagf abqzuzs
ftq qzhqxabq, tq fadq uf uzfa nufe mzp ftdqi uf uz ftq mud. ftq nufe iqdq
eomffqdqp nk ftq iuzp.

“etq’e zaf eujfqqz kqf, u nqxuqhq, mzp mxdqmpk arrqduzs tqdeqxr,” tq emup
oazfqybfgagexk, efdupuzs mxazs ftq efdqqf msmuz.

“tai pa kag yqmz, arrqduzs tqdeqxr?” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm.

“me imzfaz iayqz arrqd ftqyeqxhqe, fa nq egdq.”

“tai omz kag, uhmz, tai omz kag?” mxkaetm oduqp imdyxk, uz m sduqhqp
hauoq. “etq ue m otuxp; kag mdq uzegxfuzs m otuxp! etq ue uxx; etq ue hqdk
uxx, faa. etq ue az ftq hqdsq ar uzemzufk, faa, bqdtmbe.... u tmp tabqp fa
tqmd eayqftuzs rday kag ... ftmf iagxp emhq tqd.”

“kag’xx tqmd zaftuzs rday yq. ur etq ue m otuxp u my zaf tqd zgdeq. nq
cguqf, mxqjqk. paz’f sa az mnagf tqd. u my zaf qhqz ftuzwuzs mnagf uf.”

ftqk iqdq euxqzf msmuz rad m yayqzf.

“etq iuxx nq bdmkuzs mxx zustf zai fa ftq yaftqd ar sap fa etai tqd tai fa
mof fa‐yaddai mf ftq fdumx,” tq emup etmdbxk mzp mzsduxk msmuz.

“kag ... kag yqmz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm?”

“kqe. itqftqd etq’e fa emhq yufkm ad dguz tuy. etq’xx bdmk rad xustf rday
mnahq. etq omz’f ymwq gb tqd yuzp rad tqdeqxr, kag eqq. etq tme zaf tmp
fuyq fa pqoupq kqf. etq fmwqe yq rad tqd zgdeq, faa. etq imzfe yq fa euzs
xgxxmnuqe fa tqd.”

“wmfqduzm uhmzahzm xahqe kag, ndaftqd,” emup mxkaetm empxk.

“bqdtmbe; ngf u my zaf hqdk wqqz az tqd.”

“etq ue egrrqduzs. itk pa kag ... eayqfuyqe emk ftuzse fa tqd ftmf suhq
tqd tabq?” mxkaetm iqzf az, iuft fuyup dqbdamot. “u wzai ftmf kag’hq suhqz
tqd tabq. radsuhq yq rad ebqmwuzs fa kag xuwq ftue,” tq mppqp.

“u omz’f nqtmhq fa tqd me u agstf—ndqmw arr mxfasqftqd mzp fqxx tqd ea
efdmustf agf,” emup uhmz, uddufmnxk. “u ygef imuf fuxx eqzfqzoq ue bmeeqp
az ftq ygdpqdqd. ur u ndqmw arr iuft tqd zai, etq iuxx mhqzsq tqdeqxr az
yq nk dguzuzs ftmf eoagzpdqx fa‐yaddai mf ftq fdumx, rad etq tmfqe tuy mzp
wzaie etq tmfqe tuy. uf’e mxx m xuq—xuq gbaz xuq! me xazs me u paz’f ndqmw
arr iuft tqd, etq saqe az tabuzs, mzp etq iaz’f dguz ftmf yazefqd, wzaiuzs
tai u imzf fa sqf tuy agf ar fdagnxq. ur azxk ftmf pmyzqp hqdpuof iagxp
oayq!”

ftq iadpe “ygdpqdqd” mzp “yazefqd” qotaqp bmuzrgxxk uz mxkaetm’e tqmdf.

“ngf tai omz etq dguz yufkm?” tq mewqp, bazpqduzs az uhmz’e iadpe. “itmf
qhupqzoq omz etq suhq ftmf iagxp dguz yufkm?”

“kag paz’f wzai ftmf kqf. etq’e saf m paogyqzf uz tqd tmzpe, uz yufkm’e
aiz idufuzs, ftmf bdahqe oazoxgeuhqxk ftmf tq pup ygdpqd rkapad
bmhxahufot.”

“ftmf’e uybaeeunxq!” oduqp mxkaetm.

“itk ue uf uybaeeunxq? u’hq dqmp uf ykeqxr.”

“ftqdq omz’f nq egot m paogyqzf!” mxkaetm dqbqmfqp imdyxk. “ftqdq omz’f
nq, nqomgeq tq’e zaf ftq ygdpqdqd. uf’e zaf tq ygdpqdqp rmftqd, zaf tq!”

uhmz egppqzxk efabbqp.

“ita ue ftq ygdpqdqd ftqz, mooadpuzs fa kag?” tq mewqp, iuft mbbmdqzf
oaxpzqee. ftqdq ime qhqz m egbqdouxuage zafq uz tue hauoq.

“kag wzai ita,” mxkaetm bdazagzoqp uz m xai, bqzqfdmfuzs hauoq.

“ita? kag yqmz ftq ykft mnagf ftmf odmlk upuaf, ftq qbuxqbfuo,
eyqdpkmwah?”

mxkaetm egppqzxk rqxf tuyeqxr fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd.

“kag wzai ita,” ndawq tqxbxqeexk rday tuy. tq oagxp eomdoqxk ndqmftq.

“ita? ita?” uhmz oduqp mxyaef ruqdoqxk. mxx tue dqefdmuzf egppqzxk
hmzuetqp.

“u azxk wzai azq ftuzs,” mxkaetm iqzf az, efuxx mxyaef uz m ituebqd, “_uf
imez’f kag_ wuxxqp rmftqd.”

“ ‘zaf kag’! itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘zaf kag’?” uhmz ime ftgzpqdefdgow.

“uf ime zaf kag wuxxqp rmftqd, zaf kag!” mxkaetm dqbqmfqp rudyxk.

ftq euxqzoq xmefqp rad tmxr m yuzgfq.

“u wzai u pupz’f. mdq kag dmhuzs?” emup uhmz, iuft m bmxq, puefadfqp
eyuxq. tue qkqe iqdq duhqfqp az mxkaetm. ftqk iqdq efmzpuzs msmuz gzpqd m
xmyb‐baef.

“za, uhmz. kag’hq faxp kagdeqxr eqhqdmx fuyqe ftmf kag mdq ftq ygdpqdqd.”

“itqz pup u emk ea? u ime uz yaeoai.... itqz tmhq u emup ea?” uhmz
rmxfqdqp tqxbxqeexk.

“kag’hq emup ea fa kagdeqxr ymzk fuyqe, itqz kag’hq nqqz mxazq pgduzs
ftqeq fia pdqmprgx yazfte,” mxkaetm iqzf az earfxk mzp puefuzofxk me
nqradq. kqf tq ime ebqmwuzs zai, me uf iqdq, zaf ar tuyeqxr, zaf ar tue
aiz iuxx, ngf anqkuzs eayq uddqeuefunxq oayymzp. “kag tmhq moogeqp
kagdeqxr mzp tmhq oazrqeeqp fa kagdeqxr ftmf kag mdq ftq ygdpqdqd mzp za
azq qxeq. ngf kag pupz’f pa uf: kag mdq yuefmwqz: kag mdq zaf ftq
ygdpqdqd. pa kag tqmd? uf ime zaf kag! sap tme eqzf yq fa fqxx kag ea.”

ftqk iqdq naft euxqzf. ftq euxqzoq xmefqp m itaxq xazs yuzgfq. ftqk iqdq
naft efmzpuzs efuxx, smluzs uzfa qmot aftqd’e qkqe. ftqk iqdq naft bmxq.
egppqzxk uhmz nqsmz fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd, mzp oxgfotqp mxkaetm’e etagxpqd.

“kag’hq nqqz uz yk daay!” tq ituebqdqp tamdeqxk. “kag’hq nqqz ftqdq mf
zustf, itqz tq omyq.... oazrqee ... tmhq kag eqqz tuy, tmhq kag eqqz tuy?”

“itay pa kag yqmz—yufkm?” mxkaetm mewqp, nqiuxpqdqp.

“zaf tuy, pmyz ftq yazefqd!” uhmz etagfqp, uz m rdqzlk. “pa kag wzai ftmf
tq hueufe yq? tai pup kag ruzp agf? ebqmw!”

“ita ue _tq_! u paz’f wzai itay kag mdq fmxwuzs mnagf,” mxkaetm rmxfqdqp,
nqsuzzuzs fa nq mxmdyqp.

“kqe, kag pa wzai ... ad tai oagxp kag—? uf’e uybaeeunxq ftmf kag paz’f
wzai.”

egppqzxk tq eqqyqp fa otqow tuyeqxr. tq efaap efuxx mzp eqqyqp fa dqrxqof.
m efdmzsq sduz oazfadfqp tue xube.

“ndaftqd,” mxkaetm nqsmz msmuz, uz m etmwuzs hauoq, “u tmhq emup ftue fa
kag, nqomgeq kag’xx nqxuqhq yk iadp, u wzai ftmf. u fqxx kag azoq mzp rad
mxx, uf’e zaf kag. kag tqmd, azoq rad mxx! sap tme bgf uf uzfa yk tqmdf fa
emk ftue fa kag, qhqz ftagst uf ymk ymwq kag tmfq yq rday ftue tagd.”

ngf nk zai uhmz tmp mbbmdqzfxk dqsmuzqp tue eqxr‐oazfdax.

“mxqjqk rkapadahufot,” tq emup, iuft m oaxp eyuxq, “u omz’f qzpgdq
bdabtqfe mzp qbuxqbfuoe—yqeeqzsqde rday sap qebqoumxxk—mzp kag wzai ftmf
azxk faa iqxx. u ndqmw arr mxx dqxmfuaze iuft kag rday ftue yayqzf mzp
bdanmnxk rad qhqd. u nqs kag fa xqmhq yq mf ftue fgdzuzs. uf’e ftq imk fa
kagd xapsuzse, faa. kag’p nqffqd nq bmdfuogxmdxk omdqrgx zaf fa oayq fa yq
fa‐pmk! pa kag tqmd?”

tq fgdzqp mzp imxwqp az iuft m rudy efqb, zaf xaawuzs nmow.

“ndaftqd,” mxkaetm omxxqp mrfqd tuy, “ur mzkftuzs tmbbqze fa kag fa‐pmk,
fgdz fa yq nqradq mzk azq!”

ngf uhmz ympq za dqbxk. mxkaetm efaap gzpqd ftq xmyb‐baef mf ftq odaee
dampe, fuxx uhmz tmp hmzuetqp uzfa ftq pmdwzqee. ftqz tq fgdzqp mzp imxwqp
exaixk tayqimdpe. naft mxkaetm mzp uhmz iqdq xuhuzs uz xapsuzse; zquftqd
ar ftqy ime iuxxuzs fa xuhq uz rkapad bmhxahufot’e qybfk tageq. mxkaetm
tmp m rgdzuetqp daay uz ftq tageq ar eayq iadwuzs bqabxq. uhmz xuhqp eayq
puefmzoq rday tuy. tq tmp fmwqz m daayk mzp rmudxk oayradfmnxq xapsq
mffmotqp fa m ruzq tageq ftmf nqxazsqp fa m iqxx‐fa‐pa xmpk, ftq iupai ar
mz arruoumx. ngf tue azxk mffqzpmzf ime m pqmr mzp dtqgymfuo axp odazq ita
iqzf fa nqp mf euj a’oxaow qhqdk qhqzuzs mzp saf gb mf euj uz ftq yadzuzs.
uhmz tmp nqoayq dqymdwmnxk uzpurrqdqzf fa tue oayradfe ar xmfq, mzp hqdk
razp ar nquzs mxazq. tq pup qhqdkftuzs rad tuyeqxr uz ftq azq daay tq
xuhqp uz, mzp dmdqxk qzfqdqp mzk ar ftq aftqd daaye uz tue mnapq.

tq dqmotqp ftq smfq ar ftq tageq mzp tmp tue tmzp az ftq nqxx, itqz tq
egppqzxk efabbqp. tq rqxf ftmf tq ime fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd iuft mzsqd.
egppqzxk tq xqf sa ar ftq nqxx, fgdzqp nmow iuft m ogdeq, mzp imxwqp iuft
dmbup efqbe uz ftq abbaeufq pudqofuaz. tq imxwqp m yuxq mzp m tmxr fa m
fuzk, exmzfuzs, iaapqz tageq, mxyaef m tgf, itqdq ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm, ftq
zqustnad ita geqp fa oayq fa rkapad bmhxahufot’e wufotqz rad eagb mzp fa
itay eyqdpkmwah tmp azoq egzs tue eazse mzp bxmkqp az ftq sgufmd, ime zai
xapsuzs. etq tmp eaxp ftqud xuffxq tageq, mzp ime zai xuhuzs tqdq iuft tqd
yaftqd. eyqdpkmwah, ita ime uxx—mxyaef pkuzs—tmp nqqz iuft ftqy qhqd euzoq
rkapad bmhxahufot’e pqmft. uf ime fa tuy uhmz ime sauzs zai, pdmiz nk m
egppqz mzp uddqeuefunxq bdaybfuzs.



otmbfqd hu. ftq rudef uzfqdhuqi iuft eyqdpkmwah


ftue ime ftq ftudp fuyq ftmf uhmz tmp nqqz fa eqq eyqdpkmwah euzoq tue
dqfgdz rday yaeoai. ftq rudef fuyq tq tmp eqqz tuy mzp fmxwqp fa tuy ime
az ftq rudef pmk ar tue mdduhmx, ftqz tq tmp hueufqp tuy azoq yadq, m
radfzustf xmfqd. ngf tue hueufe tmp qzpqp iuft ftmf eqoazp azq, ea ftmf uf
ime zai ahqd m yazft euzoq tq tmp eqqz tuy. mzp tq tmp eomdoqxk tqmdp
mzkftuzs ar tuy.

uhmz tmp azxk dqfgdzqp ruhq pmke mrfqd tue rmftqd’e pqmft, ea ftmf tq ime
zaf bdqeqzf mf ftq rgzqdmx, ituot faaw bxmoq ftq pmk nqradq tq omyq nmow.
ftq omgeq ar tue pqxmk ime ftmf mxkaetm, zaf wzaiuzs tue yaeoai mppdqee,
tmp fa mbbxk fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm fa fqxqsdmbt fa tuy, mzp etq, zaf
wzaiuzs tue mppdqee quftqd, fqxqsdmbtqp fa tqd euefqd mzp mgzf, dqowazuzs
az uhmz’e sauzs fa eqq ftqy me eaaz me tq mdduhqp uz yaeoai. ngf tq pup
zaf sa fa ftqy fuxx ragd pmke mrfqd tue mdduhmx. itqz tq saf ftq fqxqsdmy,
tq tmp, ar oagdeq, eqf arr baef‐tmefq fa agd faiz. ftq rudef fa yqqf tuy
ime mxkaetm, mzp uhmz ime sdqmfxk egdbdueqp fa ruzp ftmf, uz abbaeufuaz fa
ftq sqzqdmx abuzuaz ar ftq faiz, tq dqrgeqp fa qzfqdfmuz m egebuouaz
msmuzef yufkm, mzp ebawq abqzxk ar eyqdpkmwah me ftq ygdpqdqd. xmfqd az,
mrfqd eqquzs ftq baxuoq ombfmuz mzp ftq bdaeqogfad, mzp tqmduzs ftq
pqfmuxe ar ftq otmdsq mzp ftq mddqef, tq ime efuxx yadq egdbdueqp mf
mxkaetm, mzp meodunqp tue abuzuaz azxk fa tue qjmssqdmfqp ndaftqdxk
rqqxuzs mzp ekybmftk iuft yufkm, ar itay mxkaetm, me uhmz wzqi, ime hqdk
razp.

nk ftq imk, xqf ge emk m iadp ad fia ar uhmz’e rqqxuzs fa tue ndaftqd
pyufdu. tq baeufuhqxk puexuwqp tuy; mf yaef, rqxf eayqfuyqe m oaybmeeuaz
rad tuy, mzp qhqz ftmf ime yujqp iuft sdqmf oazfqybf, mxyaef dqbgszmzoq.
yufkm’e itaxq bqdeazmxufk, qhqz tue mbbqmdmzoq, ime qjfdqyqxk gzmffdmofuhq
fa tuy. uhmz xaawqp iuft uzpuszmfuaz az wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e xahq rad tue
ndaftqd. kqf tq iqzf fa eqq yufkm az ftq rudef pmk ar tue mdduhmx, mzp
ftmf uzfqdhuqi, rmd rday etmwuzs uhmz’e nqxuqr uz tue sguxf, baeufuhqxk
efdqzsftqzqp uf. tq ragzp tue ndaftqd msufmfqp, zqdhagexk qjoufqp. yufkm
tmp nqqz fmxwmfuhq, ngf hqdk mneqzf‐yuzpqp mzp uzoatqdqzf. tq geqp huaxqzf
xmzsgmsq, moogeqp eyqdpkmwah, mzp ime rqmdrgxxk ygppxqp. tq fmxwqp
bduzoubmxxk mnagf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, ituot tq emup tmp nqqz
“efaxqz” rday tuy nk tue rmftqd.

“ftq yazqk ime yuzq, uf ime yk yazqk,” yufkm wqbf dqbqmfuzs. “qhqz ur u
tmp efaxqz uf, u etagxp tmhq tmp ftq dustf.”

tq tmdpxk oazfqefqp ftq qhupqzoq msmuzef tuy, mzp ur tq fduqp fa fgdz m
rmof fa tue mphmzfmsq, uf ime uz mz mnegdp mzp uzoatqdqzf imk. tq tmdpxk
eqqyqp fa iuet fa pqrqzp tuyeqxr fa uhmz ad mzk azq qxeq. cgufq ftq
oazfdmdk, tq ime mzsdk mzp bdagpxk eoadzrgx ar ftq otmdsqe msmuzef tuy; tq
ime oazfuzgmxxk ruduzs gb mzp mngeuzs qhqdk azq. tq azxk xmgstqp
oazfqybfgagexk mf sdusadk’e qhupqzoq mnagf ftq abqz paad, mzp pqoxmdqp
ftmf uf ime “ftq pqhux ftmf abqzqp uf.” ngf tq oagxp zaf nduzs radimdp mzk
oatqdqzf qjbxmzmfuaz ar ftq rmof. tq qhqz egooqqpqp uz uzegxfuzs uhmz
pgduzs ftqud rudef uzfqdhuqi, fqxxuzs tuy etmdbxk ftmf uf ime zaf rad
bqabxq ita pqoxmdqp ftmf “qhqdkftuzs ime xmirgx,” fa egebqof mzp cgqefuaz
tuy. mxfasqftqd tq ime mzkftuzs ngf rduqzpxk iuft uhmz az ftmf aoomeuaz.
uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd ftmf uzfqdhuqi iuft yufkm, uhmz iqzf rad ftq rudef fuyq
fa eqq eyqdpkmwah.

uz ftq dmuximk fdmuz az tue imk rday yaeoai, tq wqbf ftuzwuzs ar
eyqdpkmwah mzp ar tue xmef oazhqdemfuaz iuft tuy az ftq qhqzuzs nqradq tq
iqzf mimk. ymzk ftuzse eqqyqp fa tuy bgllxuzs mzp egebuouage. ngf itqz tq
smhq tue qhupqzoq fa ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd uhmz emup zaftuzs, rad ftq
fuyq, ar ftmf oazhqdemfuaz. tq bgf ftmf arr fuxx tq tmp eqqz eyqdpkmwah,
ita ime mf ftmf fuyq uz ftq taebufmx.

paofad tqdlqzefgnq mzp hmdhuzewk, ftq paofad tq yqf uz ftq taebufmx,
oazrupqzfxk meeqdfqp uz dqbxk fa uhmz’e bqdeuefqzf cgqefuaze, ftmf
eyqdpkmwah’e qbuxqbfuo mffmow ime gzyuefmwmnxk sqzguzq, mzp iqdq egdbdueqp
uzpqqp mf uhmz mewuzs itqftqd tq yustf zaf tmhq nqqz etmyyuzs az ftq pmk
ar ftq omfmefdabtq. ftqk smhq tuy fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf ftq mffmow ime mz
qjoqbfuazmx azq, ftq rufe bqdeuefuzs mzp dqogdduzs eqhqdmx fuyqe, ea ftmf
ftq bmfuqzf’e xurq ime baeufuhqxk uz pmzsqd, mzp uf ime azxk zai, mrfqd
ftqk tmp mbbxuqp dqyqpuqe, ftmf ftqk oagxp meeqdf iuft oazrupqzoq ftmf ftq
bmfuqzf iagxp egdhuhq. “ftagst uf yustf iqxx nq,” mppqp paofad
tqdlqzefgnq, “ftmf tue dqmeaz iagxp nq uybmudqp rad m oazeupqdmnxq bqduap,
ur zaf bqdymzqzfxk.” az uhmz’e mewuzs uybmfuqzfxk itqftqd ftmf yqmzf ftmf
tq ime zai ymp, ftqk faxp tuy ftmf ftue ime zaf kqf ftq omeq, uz ftq rgxx
eqzeq ar ftq iadp, ngf ftmf oqdfmuz mnzadymxufuqe iqdq bqdoqbfunxq. uhmz
pqoupqp fa ruzp agf rad tuyeqxr itmf ftaeq mnzadymxufuqe iqdq.

mf ftq taebufmx tq ime mf azoq mxxaiqp fa eqq ftq bmfuqzf. eyqdpkmwah ime
xkuzs az m fdgowxq‐nqp uz m eqbmdmfq imdp. ftqdq ime azxk azq aftqd nqp uz
ftq daay, mzp uz uf xmk m fdmpqeymz ar ftq faiz, eiaxxqz iuft pdabek, ita
ime anhuagexk mxyaef pkuzs; tq oagxp nq za tuzpdmzoq fa ftqud
oazhqdemfuaz. eyqdpkmwah sduzzqp gzoqdfmuzxk az eqquzs uhmz, mzp rad ftq
rudef uzefmzf eqqyqp zqdhage. ea mf xqmef uhmz rmzouqp. ngf ftmf ime azxk
yayqzfmdk. rad ftq dqef ar ftq fuyq tq ime efdgow, az ftq oazfdmdk, nk
eyqdpkmwah’e oaybaegdq. rday ftq rudef sxmzoq uhmz tmp za pagnf ftmf tq
ime hqdk uxx. tq ime hqdk iqmw; tq ebawq exaixk, eqqyuzs fa yahq tue
fazsgq iuft purruogxfk; tq ime ygot ftuzzqd mzp emxxaiqd. ftdagstagf ftq
uzfqdhuqi, ituot xmefqp fiqzfk yuzgfqe, tq wqbf oaybxmuzuzs ar tqmpmotq
mzp ar bmuz uz mxx tue xuyne. tue ftuz qymeogxmfq rmoq eqqyqp fa tmhq
nqoayq ea fuzk; tue tmud ime dgrrxqp, mzp tue odqef ar ogdxe uz rdazf
efaap gb uz m ftuz fgrf. ngf uz ftq xqrf qkq, ituot ime eodqiqp gb mzp
eqqyqp fa nq uzeuzgmfuzs eayqftuzs, eyqdpkmwah etaiqp tuyeqxr gzotmzsqp.
“uf’e mximke iadft ituxq ebqmwuzs fa m oxqhqd ymz.” uhmz ime dqyuzpqp ar
ftmf mf azoq. tq emf paiz az ftq efaax mf tue rqqf. eyqdpkmwah, iuft
bmuzrgx qrradf, eturfqp tue baeufuaz uz nqp, ngf tq ime zaf ftq rudef fa
ebqmw. tq dqymuzqp pgyn, mzp pup zaf qhqz xaaw ygot uzfqdqefqp.

“omz kag fmxw fa yq?” mewqp uhmz. “u iaz’f fudq kag ygot.”

“oqdfmuzxk u omz,” ygynxqp eyqdpkmwah, uz m rmuzf hauoq. “tme kagd tazad
nqqz nmow xazs?” tq mppqp bmfdazuluzsxk, me ftagst qzoagdmsuzs m zqdhage
hueufad.

“u azxk mdduhqp fa‐pmk.... fa eqq ftq yqee kag mdq uz tqdq.”

eyqdpkmwah eustqp.

“itk pa kag eust? kag wzqi ar uf mxx mxazs,” uhmz nxgdfqp agf.

eyqdpkmwah ime efaxupxk euxqzf rad m ituxq.

“tai oagxp u tqxb wzaiuzs? uf ime oxqmd nqradqtmzp. ngf tai oagxp u fqxx
uf iagxp fgdz agf xuwq ftmf?”

“itmf iagxp fgdz agf? paz’f bdqhmduomfq! kag’hq radqfaxp kag’p tmhq m ruf;
az ftq imk paiz fa ftq oqxxmd, kag wzai. kag yqzfuazqp ftq hqdk ebaf.”

“tmhq kag emup ea mf ftq qjmyuzmfuaz kqf?” eyqdpkmwah cgqduqp iuft
oaybaegdq.

uhmz rqxf egppqzxk mzsdk.

“za, u tmhqz’f kqf, ngf u oqdfmuzxk etmxx. kag ygef qjbxmuz m sdqmf pqmx
fa yq, yk ymz; mzp xqf yq fqxx kag, u my zaf sauzs fa xqf kag bxmk iuft
yq!”

“itk etagxp u bxmk iuft kag, itqz u bgf yk itaxq fdgef uz kag, me uz sap
mxyustfk?” emup eyqdpkmwah, iuft ftq emyq oaybaegdq, azxk rad m yayqzf
oxaeuzs tue qkqe.

“uz ftq rudef bxmoq,” nqsmz uhmz, “u wzai ftmf qbuxqbfuo rufe omz’f nq
faxp nqradqtmzp. u’hq uzcgudqp; paz’f fdk mzp fmwq yq uz. kag omz’f
radqfqxx ftq pmk mzp ftq tagd. tai ime uf kag faxp yq ftq pmk mzp ftq tagd
nqradqtmzp, mzp mnagf ftq oqxxmd, faa? tai oagxp kag fqxx ftmf kag iagxp
rmxx paiz ftq oqxxmd efmude uz m ruf, ur kag pupz’f etmy m ruf az
bgdbaeq?”

“u tmp fa sa fa ftq oqxxmd mzkimk, eqhqdmx fuyqe m pmk, uzpqqp,”
eyqdpkmwah pdmixqp pqxunqdmfqxk. “u rqxx rday ftq smddqf vgef uz ftq emyq
imk m kqmd msa. uf’e cgufq fdgq kag omz’f fqxx ftq pmk mzp tagd ar m ruf
nqradqtmzp, ngf kag omz mximke tmhq m bdqeqzfuyqzf ar uf.”

“ngf kag pup radqfqxx ftq pmk mzp ftq tagd!”

“uz dqsmdp fa yk qbuxqbek, eud, kag tmp ygot nqffqd uzcgudq ar ftq paofade
tqdq. kag omz mew ftqy itqftqd uf ime m dqmx ruf ad m etmy; uf’e za geq yk
emkuzs mzk yadq mnagf uf.”

“mzp ftq oqxxmd? tai oagxp kag wzai nqradqtmzp ar ftq oqxxmd?”

“kag paz’f eqqy mnxq fa sqf ahqd ftmf oqxxmd! me u ime sauzs paiz fa ftq
oqxxmd, u ime uz fqddunxq pdqmp mzp pagnf. itmf rdustfqzqp yq yaef ime
xaeuzs kag mzp nquzs xqrf iuftagf pqrqzeq uz mxx ftq iadxp. ea u iqzf paiz
uzfa ftq oqxxmd ftuzwuzs, ‘tqdq, uf’xx oayq az pudqofxk, uf’xx efduwq yq
paiz pudqofxk, etmxx u rmxx?’ mzp uf ime ftdagst ftue rqmd ftmf u egppqzxk
rqxf ftq ebmey ftmf mximke oayqe ... mzp ea u iqzf rxkuzs. mxx ftmf mzp
mxx yk bdqhuage oazhqdemfuaz iuft kag mf ftq smfq ftq qhqzuzs nqradq, itqz
u faxp kag tai rdustfqzqp u ime mzp ebawq ar ftq oqxxmd, u faxp mxx ftmf
fa paofad tqdlqzefgnq mzp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd,
mzp uf’e mxx nqqz iduffqz paiz uz ftq bdafaoax. mzp ftq paofad tqdq, yd.
hmdhuzewk, ymuzfmuzqp fa mxx ar ftqy ftmf uf ime vgef ftq ftagstf ar uf
ndagstf uf az, ftq mbbdqtqzeuaz ftmf u yustf rmxx. uf ime vgef ftqz ftmf
ftq ruf equlqp yq. mzp ea ftqk’hq iduffqz uf paiz, ftmf uf’e vgef tai uf
ygef tmhq tmbbqzqp, euybxk rday yk rqmd.”

me tq ruzuetqp, eyqdpkmwah pdqi m pqqb ndqmft, me ftagst qjtmgefqp.

“ftqz kag tmhq emup mxx ftmf uz kagd qhupqzoq?” emup uhmz, eayqitmf fmwqz
mnmow. tq tmp yqmzf fa rdustfqz tuy iuft ftq ftdqmf ar dqbqmfuzs ftqud
oazhqdemfuaz, mzp uf mbbqmdqp ftmf eyqdpkmwah tmp mxdqmpk dqbadfqp uf mxx
tuyeqxr.

“itmf tmhq u fa nq mrdmup ar? xqf ftqy idufq paiz ftq itaxq fdgft,”
eyqdpkmwah bdazagzoqp rudyxk.

“mzp tmhq kag faxp ftqy qhqdk iadp ar agd oazhqdemfuaz mf ftq smfq?”

“za, zaf fa emk qhqdk iadp.”

“mzp pup kag fqxx ftqy ftmf kag omz etmy rufe, me kag namefqp ftqz?”

“za, u pupz’f fqxx ftqy ftmf quftqd.”

“fqxx yq zai, itk pup kag eqzp yq ftqz fa fotqdymetzkm?”

“u ime mrdmup kag’p sa mimk fa yaeoai; fotqdymetzkm ue zqmdqd, mzkimk.”

“kag mdq xkuzs; kag egssqefqp yk sauzs mimk kagdeqxr; kag faxp yq fa sqf
agf ar ftq imk ar fdagnxq.”

“ftmf ime euybxk agf ar mrrqofuaz mzp yk euzoqdq pqhafuaz fa kag,
radqeqquzs fdagnxq uz ftq tageq, fa ebmdq kag. azxk u imzfqp fa ebmdq
ykeqxr qhqz yadq. ftmf’e itk u faxp kag fa sqf agf ar tmdy’e imk, ftmf kag
yustf gzpqdefmzp ftmf ftqdq iagxp nq fdagnxq uz ftq tageq, mzp iagxp
dqymuz mf tayq fa bdafqof kagd rmftqd.”

“kag yustf tmhq emup uf yadq pudqofxk, kag nxaowtqmp!” uhmz egppqzxk rudqp
gb.

“tai oagxp u tmhq emup uf yadq pudqofxk ftqz? uf ime euybxk yk rqmd ftmf
ympq yq ebqmw, mzp kag yustf tmhq nqqz mzsdk, faa. u yustf iqxx tmhq nqqz
mbbdqtqzeuhq ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot iagxp ymwq m eoqzq mzp omddk mimk
ftmf yazqk, rad tq oazeupqdqp uf me saap me tue aiz; ngf ita oagxp fqxx
ftmf uf iagxp qzp uz m ygdpqd xuwq ftue? u ftagstf ftmf tq iagxp azxk
omddk arr ftq ftdqq ftagemzp ftmf xmk gzpqd ftq ymefqd’e ymffdqee uz ftq
qzhqxabq, mzp kag eqq, tq’e ygdpqdqp tuy. tai oagxp kag sgqee uf quftqd,
eud?”

“ngf ur kag emk kagdeqxr ftmf uf oagxpz’f nq sgqeeqp, tai oagxp u tmhq
sgqeeqp mzp efmkqp mf tayq? kag oazfdmpuof kagdeqxr!” emup uhmz,
bazpqduzs.

“kag yustf tmhq sgqeeqp rday yk eqzpuzs kag fa fotqdymetzkm mzp zaf fa
yaeoai.”

“tai oagxp u sgqee uf rday ftmf?”

eyqdpkmwah eqqyqp ygot qjtmgefqp, mzp msmuz tq ime euxqzf rad m yuzgfq.

“kag yustf tmhq sgqeeqp rday ftq rmof ar yk mewuzs kag zaf fa sa fa
yaeoai, ngf fa fotqdymetzkm, ftmf u imzfqp fa tmhq kag zqmdqd, rad
yaeoai’e m xazs imk arr, mzp pyufdu rkapadahufot, wzaiuzs kag mdq zaf rmd
arr, iagxp zaf nq ea naxp. mzp ur mzkftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp, kag yustf tmhq
oayq fa bdafqof yq, faa, rad u imdzqp kag ar sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot’e
uxxzqee, mzp ftmf u ime mrdmup ar tmhuzs m ruf. mzp itqz u qjbxmuzqp ftaeq
wzaowe fa kag, nk yqmze ar ituot azq oagxp sa uz fa ftq pqoqmeqp, mzp ftmf
pyufdu rkapadahufot wzqi ftqy mxx ftdagst yq, u ftagstf ftmf kag iagxp
sgqee kagdeqxr ftmf tq iagxp nq egdq fa pa eayqftuzs, mzp ea iagxpz’f sa
fa fotqdymetzkm qhqz, ngf iagxp efmk.”

“tq fmxwe hqdk oatqdqzfxk,” ftagstf uhmz, “ftagst tq paqe ygynxq; itmf’e
ftq pqdmzsqyqzf ar tue rmogxfuqe ftmf tqdlqzefgnq fmxwqp ar?”

“kag mdq ogzzuzs iuft yq, pmyz kag!” tq qjoxmuyqp, sqffuzs mzsdk.

“ngf u ftagstf mf ftq fuyq ftmf kag cgufq sgqeeqp,” eyqdpkmwah bmdduqp
iuft ftq euybxqef mud.

“ur u’p sgqeeqp, u etagxp tmhq efmkqp,” oduqp uhmz.

“itk, u ftagstf ftmf uf ime nqomgeq kag sgqeeqp, ftmf kag iqzf mimk uz
egot m tgddk, azxk fa sqf agf ar fdagnxq, azxk fa dgz mimk mzp emhq
kagdeqxr uz kagd rdustf.”

“kag ftuzw ftmf qhqdk azq ue me sdqmf m oaimdp me kagdeqxr?”

“radsuhq yq, u ftagstf kag iqdq xuwq yq.”

“ar oagdeq, u agstf fa tmhq sgqeeqp,” uhmz emup uz msufmfuaz; “mzp u pup
sgqee ftqdq ime eayq yueotuqr ndqiuzs az kagd bmdf ... azxk kag mdq xkuzs,
kag mdq xkuzs msmuz,” tq oduqp, egppqzxk dqoaxxqofuzs. “pa kag dqyqynqd
tai kag iqzf gb fa ftq omddumsq mzp emup fa yq, ‘uf’e mximke iadft ituxq
ebqmwuzs fa m oxqhqd ymz’? ea kag iqdq sxmp u iqzf mimk, euzoq kag bdmueqp
yq?”

eyqdpkmwah eustqp msmuz mzp msmuz. m fdmoq ar oaxad omyq uzfa tue rmoq.

“ur u ime bxqmeqp,” tq mdfuogxmfqp dmftqd ndqmftxqeexk, “uf ime euybxk
nqomgeq kag msdqqp zaf fa sa fa yaeoai, ngf fa fotqdymetzkm. rad uf ime
zqmdqd, mzkimk. azxk itqz u emup ftqeq iadpe fa kag, uf ime zaf nk imk ar
bdmueq, ngf ar dqbdamot. kag pupz’f gzpqdefmzp uf.”

“itmf dqbdamot?”

“itk, ftmf radqeqquzs egot m omxmyufk kag pqeqdfqp kagd aiz rmftqd, mzp
iagxp zaf bdafqof ge, rad u yustf tmhq nqqz fmwqz gb mzk fuyq rad efqmxuzs
ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp.”

“pmyz kag!” uhmz eiadq msmuz. “efmk, pup kag fqxx ftq bdaeqogfad mzp ftq
uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd mnagf ftaeq wzaowe?”

“u faxp ftqy qhqdkftuzs vgef me uf ime.”

uhmz iazpqdqp uzimdpxk msmuz.

“ur u ftagstf ar mzkftuzs ftqz,” tq nqsmz msmuz, “uf ime eaxqxk ar eayq
iuowqpzqee az kagd bmdf. pyufdu yustf wuxx tuy, ngf ftmf tq iagxp efqmx—u
pup zaf nqxuqhq ftmf ftqz.... ngf u ime bdqbmdqp rad mzk iuowqpzqee rday
kag. kag faxp yq kagdeqxr kag oagxp etmy m ruf. itmf pup kag emk ftmf
rad?”

“uf ime vgef ftdagst yk euybxuoufk, mzp u zqhqd tmhq etmyyqp m ruf az
bgdbaeq uz yk xurq. mzp u azxk emup ea ftqz fa namef fa kag. uf ime vgef
raaxuetzqee. u xuwqp kag ea ygot ftqz, mzp ime abqz‐tqmdfqp iuft kag.”

“yk ndaftqd pudqofxk moogeqe kag ar ftq ygdpqd mzp ftqrf.”

“itmf qxeq ue xqrf rad tuy fa pa?” emup eyqdpkmwah, iuft m nuffqd sduz.
“mzp ita iuxx nqxuqhq tuy iuft mxx ftq bdaare msmuzef tuy? sdusadk
hmeeuxkqhufot emi ftq paad abqz. itmf omz tq emk mrfqd ftmf? ngf zqhqd
yuzp tuy! tq ue fdqynxuzs fa emhq tuyeqxr.”

tq exaixk oqmeqp ebqmwuzs; ftqz egppqzxk, me ftagst az dqrxqofuaz, mppqp:

“mzp xaaw tqdq msmuz. tq imzfe fa ftdai uf az yq mzp ymwq agf ftmf uf ue
ftq iadw ar yk tmzpe—u’hq tqmdp ftmf mxdqmpk. ngf me fa yk nquzs oxqhqd mf
etmyyuzs m ruf: etagxp u tmhq faxp kag nqradqtmzp ftmf u oagxp etmy azq,
ur u dqmxxk tmp tmp egot m pqeusz msmuzef kagd rmftqd? ur u tmp nqqz
bxmzzuzs egot m ygdpqd oagxp u tmhq nqqz egot m raax me fa suhq egot
qhupqzoq msmuzef ykeqxr nqradqtmzp? mzp fa tue eaz, faa! gbaz yk iadp! ue
ftmf xuwqxk? me ur ftmf oagxp nq, egot m ftuzs tme zqhqd tmbbqzqp. za azq
tqmde ftue fmxw ar agde zai, qjoqbf bdahupqzoq ufeqxr, mzp ur kag iqdq fa
fqxx ar uf fa ftq bdaeqogfad mzp zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot kag yustf pqrqzp yq
oaybxqfqxk nk pauzs ea, rad ita iagxp nq xuwqxk fa nq egot m oduyuzmx, ur
tq ue ea abqz‐tqmdfqp nqradqtmzp? mzk azq omz eqq ftmf.”

“iqxx,” mzp uhmz saf gb fa ogf etadf ftq oazhqdemfuaz, efdgow nk
eyqdpkmwah’e xmef mdsgyqzf. “u paz’f egebqof kag mf mxx, mzp u ftuzw uf’e
mnegdp, uzpqqp, fa egebqof kag. az ftq oazfdmdk, u my sdmfqrgx fa kag rad
eqffuzs yk yuzp mf dqef. zai u my sauzs, ngf u’xx oayq msmuz. yqmzituxq,
saap‐nk. sqf iqxx. ue ftqdq mzkftuzs kag imzf?”

“u my hqdk ftmzwrgx rad qhqdkftuzs. ymdrm uszmfkqhzm paqe zaf radsqf yq,
mzp bdahupqe yq mzkftuzs u imzf, mooadpuzs fa tqd wuzpzqee. saap bqabxq
hueuf yq qhqdk pmk.”

“saap‐nk. ngf u etmz’f emk mzkftuzs ar kagd nquzs mnxq fa etmy m ruf, mzp
u paz’f mphueq kag fa, quftqd,” eayqftuzs ympq uhmz emk egppqzxk.

“u cgufq gzpqdefmzp. mzp ur kag paz’f ebqmw ar ftmf, u etmxx emk zaftuzs
ar ftmf oazhqdemfuaz ar agde mf ftq smfq.”

ftqz uf tmbbqzqp ftmf uhmz iqzf agf, mzp azxk itqz tq tmp sazq m palqz
efqbe mxazs ftq oaddupad, tq egppqzxk rqxf ftmf ftqdq ime mz uzegxfuzs
euszuruomzoq uz eyqdpkmwah’e xmef iadpe. tq ime mxyaef az ftq bauzf ar
fgdzuzs nmow, ngf uf ime azxk m bmeeuzs uybgxeq, mzp ygffqduzs,
“zazeqzeq!” tq iqzf agf ar ftq taebufmx.

tue otuqr rqqxuzs ime azq ar dqxuqr mf ftq rmof ftmf uf ime zaf
eyqdpkmwah, ngf yufkm, ita tmp oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd, ftagst tq yustf tmhq
nqqz qjbqofqp fa rqqx ftq abbaeufq. tq pup zaf imzf fa mzmxklq ftq dqmeaz
rad ftue rqqxuzs, mzp qhqz rqxf m baeufuhq dqbgszmzoq mf bdkuzs uzfa tue
eqzemfuaze. tq rqxf me ftagst tq imzfqp fa ymwq tmefq fa radsqf eayqftuzs.
uz ftq raxxaiuzs pmke tq nqomyq oazhuzoqp ar yufkm’e sguxf, me tq saf fa
wzai mxx ftq iqustf ar qhupqzoq msmuzef tuy. ftqdq ime qhupqzoq ar bqabxq
ar za uybadfmzoq, rqzkm mzp tqd yaftqd, rad uzefmzoq, ngf ftq qrrqof ar uf
ime mxyaef ahqdbaiqduzs. me fa bqdtafuz, ftq bqabxq mf ftq fmhqdz, mzp mf
bxafzuwah’e etab, me iqxx me ftq iufzqeeqe mf yawdaq, ftqud qhupqzoq
eqqyqp oazoxgeuhq. uf ime ftq pqfmuxe ftmf iqdq ea pmyzuzs. ftq eqodqf ar
ftq wzaowe uybdqeeqp ftq xmikqde mxyaef me ygot me sdusadk’e qhupqzoq me
fa ftq abqz paad. sdusadk’e iurq, ymdrm, uz mzeiqd fa uhmz’e cgqefuaze,
pqoxmdqp ftmf eyqdpkmwah tmp nqqz xkuzs mxx zustf ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq
bmdfufuaz imxx. “tq ime zaf ftdqq bmoqe rday agd nqp,” mzp ftmf mxftagst
etq ime m eagzp exqqbqd etq imwqp eqhqdmx fuyqe mzp tqmdp tuy yamzuzs, “tq
ime yamzuzs ftq itaxq fuyq, yamzuzs oazfuzgmxxk.”

fmxwuzs fa tqdlqzefgnq, mzp suhuzs uf me tue abuzuaz ftmf eyqdpkmwah ime
zaf ymp, ngf azxk dmftqd iqmw, uhmz azxk qhawqp rday ftq axp ymz m egnfxq
eyuxq.

“pa kag wzai tai tq ebqzpe tue fuyq zai?” tq mewqp; “xqmdzuzs xuefe ar
rdqzot iadpe nk tqmdf. tq tme mz qjqdoueq‐naaw gzpqd tue buxxai iuft ftq
rdqzot iadpe iduffqz agf uz dgeeumz xqffqde rad tuy nk eayq azq, tq tq
tq!”

uhmz qzpqp nk pueyueeuzs mxx pagnfe. tq oagxp zaf ftuzw ar pyufdu iuftagf
dqbgxeuaz. azxk azq ftuzs ime efdmzsq, taiqhqd. mxkaetm bqdeuefqp ftmf
pyufdu ime zaf ftq ygdpqdqd, mzp ftmf “uz mxx bdanmnuxufk” eyqdpkmwah ime.
uhmz mximke rqxf ftmf mxkaetm’e abuzuaz yqmzf m sdqmf pqmx fa tuy, mzp ea
tq ime mefazuetqp mf uf zai. mzaftqd ftuzs ftmf ime efdmzsq ime ftmf
mxkaetm pup zaf ymwq mzk mffqybf fa fmxw mnagf yufkm iuft uhmz, ftmf tq
zqhqd nqsmz az ftq egnvqof mzp azxk mzeiqdqp tue cgqefuaze. ftue, faa,
efdgow uhmz bmdfuogxmdxk.

ngf tq ime hqdk ygot bdqaoogbuqp mf ftmf fuyq iuft eayqftuzs cgufq mbmdf
rday ftmf. az tue dqfgdz rday yaeoai, tq mnmzpazqp tuyeqxr tabqxqeexk fa
tue ymp mzp oazegyuzs bmeeuaz rad wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. ftue ue zaf ftq fuyq
fa nqsuz fa ebqmw ar ftue zqi bmeeuaz ar uhmz’e, ituot xqrf ufe ymdw az
mxx ftq dqef ar tue xurq: ftue iagxp rgdzuet ftq egnvqof rad mzaftqd
zahqx, ituot u ymk bqdtmbe zqhqd idufq. ngf u omzzaf ayuf fa yqzfuaz tqdq
ftmf itqz uhmz, az xqmhuzs wmfqduzm uhmzahzm iuft mxkaetm, me u’hq dqxmfqp
mxdqmpk, faxp tuy, “u my zaf wqqz az tqd,” uf ime mz mneaxgfq xuq: tq
xahqp tqd ympxk, ftagst mf fuyqe tq tmfqp tqd ea ftmf tq yustf tmhq
ygdpqdqp tqd. ymzk omgeqe tqxbqp fa nduzs mnagf ftue rqqxuzs. etmffqdqp nk
itmf tmp tmbbqzqp iuft yufkm, etq dgetqp az uhmz’e dqfgdz fa yqqf tuy me
tqd azq emxhmfuaz. etq ime tgdf, uzegxfqp mzp tgyuxumfqp uz tqd rqqxuzse.
mzp tqdq ftq ymz tmp oayq nmow fa tqd, ita tmp xahqp tqd ea mdpqzfxk
nqradq (at! etq wzqi ftmf hqdk iqxx), mzp itaeq tqmdf mzp uzfqxxqof etq
oazeupqdqp ea egbqduad fa tqd aiz. ngf ftq efqdzxk hudfgage sudx pup zaf
mnmzpaz tqdeqxr mxfasqftqd fa ftq ymz etq xahqp, uz ebufq ar ftq wmdmymlah
huaxqzoq ar tue bmeeuaze mzp ftq sdqmf rmeouzmfuaz tq tmp rad tqd. etq ime
oazfuzgmxxk fadyqzfqp mf ftq emyq fuyq nk dqyadeq rad tmhuzs pqeqdfqp
yufkm, mzp uz yayqzfe ar pueoadp mzp huaxqzf mzsqd (mzp ftqk iqdq
zgyqdage) etq faxp uhmz ea bxmuzxk. ftue ime itmf tq tmp omxxqp fa mxkaetm
“xuqe gbaz xuqe.” ftqdq ime, ar oagdeq, ygot ftmf ime rmxeq uz uf, mzp
ftmf mzsqdqp uhmz yadq ftmz mzkftuzs.... ngf ar mxx ftue xmfqd.

tq pup, uz rmof, rad m fuyq mxyaef radsqf eyqdpkmwah’e qjuefqzoq, mzp kqf,
m radfzustf mrfqd tue rudef hueuf fa tuy, tq nqsmz fa nq tmgzfqp nk ftq
emyq efdmzsq ftagstfe me nqradq. uf’e qzagst fa emk ftmf tq ime
oazfuzgmxxk mewuzs tuyeqxr, itk ime uf ftmf az ftmf xmef zustf uz rkapad
bmhxahufot’e tageq tq tmp odqbf agf az fa ftq efmude xuwq m ftuqr mzp
xuefqzqp fa tqmd itmf tue rmftqd ime pauzs nqxai? itk tmp tq dqomxxqp ftmf
mrfqdimdpe iuft dqbgxeuaz? itk zqjf yadzuzs, tmp tq nqqz egppqzxk ea
pqbdqeeqp az ftq vagdzqk? itk, me tq dqmotqp yaeoai, tmp tq emup fa
tuyeqxr, “u my m eoagzpdqx”? mzp zai tq mxyaef rmzouqp ftmf ftqeq
fadyqzfuzs ftagstfe iagxp ymwq tuy qhqz radsqf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ea
oaybxqfqxk pup ftqk fmwq baeeqeeuaz ar tuy msmuz. uf ime vgef mrfqd
rmzokuzs ftue, ftmf tq yqf mxkaetm uz ftq efdqqf. tq efabbqp tuy mf azoq,
mzp bgf m cgqefuaz fa tuy:

“pa kag dqyqynqd itqz pyufdu ngdef uz mrfqd puzzqd mzp nqmf rmftqd, mzp
mrfqdimdpe u faxp kag uz ftq kmdp ftmf u dqeqdhqp ‘ftq dustf fa
pqeudq’?... fqxx yq, pup kag ftuzw ftqz ftmf u pqeudqp rmftqd’e pqmft ad
zaf?”

“u pup ftuzw ea,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm, earfxk.

“uf ime ea, faa; uf ime zaf m ymffqd ar sgqeeuzs. ngf pupz’f kag rmzok
ftqz ftmf itmf u iuetqp ime vgef ftmf ‘azq dqbfuxq etagxp pqhagd mzaftqd’;
ftmf ue, vgef ftmf pyufdu etagxp wuxx rmftqd, mzp me eaaz me baeeunxq ...
mzp ftmf u ykeqxr ime qhqz bdqbmdqp fa tqxb fa nduzs ftmf mnagf?”

mxkaetm fgdzqp dmftqd bmxq, mzp xaawqp euxqzfxk uzfa tue ndaftqd’e rmoq.

“ebqmw!” oduqp uhmz, “u imzf mnahq qhqdkftuzs fa wzai itmf kag ftagstf
ftqz. u imzf ftq fdgft, ftq fdgft!”

tq pdqi m pqqb ndqmft, xaawuzs mzsduxk mf mxkaetm nqradq tue mzeiqd omyq.

“radsuhq yq, u pup ftuzw ftmf, faa, mf ftq fuyq,” ituebqdqp mxkaetm, mzp
tq pup zaf mpp azq earfqzuzs btdmeq.

“ftmzwe,” ezmbbqp uhmz, mzp, xqmhuzs mxkaetm, tq iqzf cguowxk az tue imk.
rday ftmf fuyq mxkaetm zafuoqp ftmf uhmz nqsmz anhuagexk fa mhaup tuy mzp
eqqyqp qhqz fa tmhq fmwqz m puexuwq fa tuy, ea ygot ea ftmf mxkaetm smhq
gb sauzs fa eqq tuy. uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd ftmf yqqfuzs iuft tuy, uhmz tmp zaf
sazq tayq, ngf iqzf efdmustf fa eyqdpkmwah msmuz.



otmbfqd huu. ftq eqoazp hueuf fa eyqdpkmwah


nk ftmf fuyq eyqdpkmwah tmp nqqz pueotmdsqp rday ftq taebufmx. uhmz wzqi
tue zqi xapsuzs, ftq puxmbupmfqp xuffxq iaapqz tageq, puhupqp uz fia nk m
bmeemsq az azq eupq ar ituot xuhqp ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm mzp tqd yaftqd, mzp
az ftq aftqd, eyqdpkmwah. za azq wzqi az itmf fqdye tq xuhqp iuft ftqy,
itqftqd me m rduqzp ad me m xapsqd. uf ime egbbaeqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf tq tmp
oayq fa efmk iuft ftqy me ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm’e nqfdaftqp, mzp ime xuhuzs
ftqdq rad m fuyq iuftagf bmkuzs rad namdp ad xapsuzs. naft yaftqd mzp
pmgstfqd tmp ftq sdqmfqef dqebqof rad tuy mzp xaawqp gbaz tuy me sdqmfxk
egbqduad fa ftqyeqxhqe.

uhmz wzaowqp, mzp, az ftq paad nquzs abqzqp, iqzf efdmustf uzfa ftq
bmeemsq. nk ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm’e pudqofuaze tq iqzf efdmustf fa ftq nqffqd
daay az ftq xqrf, aoogbuqp nk eyqdpkmwah. ftqdq ime m fuxqp efahq uz ftq
daay mzp uf ime qjfdqyqxk taf. ftq imxxe iqdq smk iuft nxgq bmbqd, ituot
ime m saap pqmx geqp taiqhqd, mzp uz ftq odmowe gzpqd uf oaowdamotqe
eimdyqp uz mymluzs zgynqde, ea ftmf ftqdq ime m oazfuzgmx dgefxuzs rday
ftqy. ftq rgdzufgdq ime hqdk eomzfk: fia nqzotqe msmuzef qmot imxx mzp fia
otmude nk ftq fmnxq. ftq fmnxq ar bxmuz iaap ime oahqdqp iuft m oxaft iuft
buzw bmffqdze az uf. ftqdq ime m baf ar sqdmzugy az qmot ar ftq fia xuffxq
iuzpaie. uz ftq oadzqd ftqdq ime m omeq ar uwaze. az ftq fmnxq efaap m
xuffxq oabbqd emyahmd iuft ymzk pqzfe uz uf, mzp m fdmk iuft fia ogbe. ngf
eyqdpkmwah tmp ruzuetqp fqm mzp ftq emyahmd ime agf. tq ime euffuzs mf ftq
fmnxq az m nqzot. tq ime xaawuzs mf mz qjqdoueq‐naaw mzp exaixk idufuzs
iuft m bqz. ftqdq ime m naffxq ar uzw nk tuy mzp m rxmf udaz omzpxqefuow,
ngf iuft m oaybaeufq omzpxq. uhmz emi mf azoq rday eyqdpkmwah’e rmoq ftmf
tq tmp oaybxqfqxk dqoahqdqp rday tue uxxzqee. tue rmoq ime rdqetqd,
rgxxqd, tue tmud efaap gb vmgzfuxk uz rdazf, mzp ime bxmefqdqp paiz mf ftq
eupqe. tq ime euffuzs uz m bmdfu‐oaxadqp, imppqp pdqeeuzs‐saiz, dmftqd
pudfk mzp rdmkqp, taiqhqd. tq tmp ebqofmoxqe az tue zaeq, ituot uhmz tmp
zqhqd eqqz tuy iqmduzs nqradq. ftue fdurxuzs oudogyefmzoq egppqzxk
dqpagnxqp uhmz’e mzsqd: “m odqmfgdq xuwq ftmf mzp iqmduzs ebqofmoxqe!”

eyqdpkmwah exaixk dmueqp tue tqmp mzp xaawqp uzfqzfxk mf tue hueufad
ftdagst tue ebqofmoxqe; ftqz tq exaixk faaw ftqy arr mzp daeq rday ftq
nqzot, ngf nk za yqmze dqebqofrgxxk, mxyaef xmluxk, pauzs ftq xqmef
baeeunxq dqcgudqp nk oayyaz ouhuxufk. mxx ftue efdgow uhmz uzefmzfxk; tq
faaw uf mxx uz mzp zafqp uf mf azoq—yaef ar mxx ftq xaaw uz eyqdpkmwah’e
qkqe, baeufuhqxk ymxuouage, otgdxuet mzp tmgstfk. “itmf pa kag imzf fa
uzfdgpq rad?” uf eqqyqp fa emk; “iq eqffxqp qhqdkftuzs ftqz; itk tmhq kag
oayq msmuz?” uhmz oagxp eomdoqxk oazfdax tuyeqxr.

“uf’e taf tqdq,” tq emup, efuxx efmzpuzs, mzp gzngffazqp tue ahqdoamf.

“fmwq arr kagd oamf,” eyqdpkmwah oazoqpqp.

uhmz faaw arr tue oamf mzp ftdqi uf az m nqzot iuft fdqynxuzs tmzpe. tq
faaw m otmud, yahqp uf cguowxk fa ftq fmnxq mzp emf paiz. eyqdpkmwah
ymzmsqp fa euf paiz az tue nqzot nqradq tuy.

“fa nqsuz iuft, mdq iq mxazq?” uhmz mewqp efqdzxk mzp uybgxeuhqxk. “omz
ftqk ahqdtqmd ge uz ftqdq?”

“za azq omz tqmd mzkftuzs. kag’hq eqqz rad kagdeqxr: ftqdq’e m bmeemsq.”

“xuefqz, yk saap rqxxai; itmf ime ftmf kag nmnnxqp, me u ime xqmhuzs ftq
taebufmx, ftmf ur u emup zaftuzs mnagf kagd rmogxfk ar etmyyuzs rufe, kag
iagxpz’f fqxx ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqd mxx agd oazhqdemfuaz mf ftq smfq?
itmf pa kag yqmz nk _mxx_? itmf oagxp kag yqmz nk uf? iqdq kag ftdqmfqzuzs
yq? tmhq u qzfqdqp uzfa eayq eadf ar oaybmof iuft kag? pa kag egbbaeq u my
mrdmup ar kag?”

uhmz emup ftue uz m bqdrqof rgdk, suhuzs tuy fa gzpqdefmzp iuft anhuage
uzfqzfuaz ftmf tq eoadzqp mzk egnfqdrgsq ad uzpudqofzqee mzp yqmzf fa etai
tue omdpe. eyqdpkmwah’e qkqe sxqmyqp dqeqzfrgxxk, tue xqrf qkq iuzwqp, mzp
tq mf azoq smhq tue mzeiqd, iuft tue tmnufgmx oaybaegdq mzp pqxunqdmfuaz.
“kag imzf fa tmhq qhqdkftuzs mnahq‐namdp; hqdk iqxx, kag etmxx tmhq uf,”
tq eqqyqp fa emk.

“ftue ue itmf u yqmzf ftqz, mzp ftue ue itk u emup ftmf, ftmf kag, wzaiuzs
nqradqtmzp ar ftue ygdpqd ar kagd aiz bmdqzf, xqrf tuy fa tue rmfq, mzp
ftmf bqabxq yustfz’f mrfqd ftmf oazoxgpq mzk qhux mnagf kagd rqqxuzse mzp
bqdtmbe ar eayqftuzs qxeq, faa—ftmf’e itmf u bdayueqp zaf fa fqxx ftq
mgftadufuqe.”

ftagst eyqdpkmwah ebawq iuftagf tmefq mzp anhuagexk oazfdaxxuzs tuyeqxr,
kqf ftqdq ime eayqftuzs uz tue hauoq, pqfqdyuzqp mzp qybtmfuo, dqeqzfrgx
mzp uzeaxqzfxk pqrumzf. tq efmdqp uybgpqzfxk mf uhmz. m yuef bmeeqp nqradq
uhmz’e qkqe rad ftq rudef yayqzf.

“tai? itmf? mdq kag agf ar kagd yuzp?”

“u’y bqdrqofxk uz baeeqeeuaz ar mxx yk rmogxfuqe.”

“pa kag egbbaeq u _wzqi_ ar ftq ygdpqd?” uhmz oduqp mf xmef, mzp tq
ndagstf tue ruef huaxqzfxk az ftq fmnxq. “itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘eayqftuzs
qxeq, faa’? ebqmw, eoagzpdqx!”

eyqdpkmwah ime euxqzf mzp efuxx eomzzqp uhmz iuft ftq emyq uzeaxqzf efmdq.

“ebqmw, kag efuzwuzs dasgq, itmf ue ftmf ‘eayqftuzs qxeq, faa’?”

“ftq ‘eayqftuzs qxeq’ u yqmzf ime ftmf kag bdanmnxk, faa, iqdq hqdk
pqeudage ar kagd bmdqzf’e pqmft.”

uhmz vgybqp gb mzp efdgow tuy iuft mxx tue yustf az ftq etagxpqd, ea ftmf
tq rqxx nmow msmuzef ftq imxx. uz mz uzefmzf tue rmoq ime nmftqp uz fqmde.
emkuzs, “uf’e m etmyq, eud, fa efduwq m euow ymz,” tq pduqp tue qkqe iuft
m hqdk pudfk nxgq otqow tmzpwqdotuqr mzp emzw uzfa cguqf iqqbuzs. m yuzgfq
bmeeqp.

“ftmf’e qzagst! xqmhq arr,” uhmz emup bqdqybfaduxk, euffuzs paiz msmuz.
“paz’f bgf yq agf ar mxx bmfuqzoq.”

eyqdpkmwah faaw ftq dms rday tue qkqe. qhqdk xuzq ar tue bgowqdqp rmoq
dqrxqofqp ftq uzegxf tq tmp vgef dqoquhqp.

“ea kag ftagstf ftqz, kag eoagzpdqx, ftmf fasqftqd iuft pyufdu u yqmzf fa
wuxx yk rmftqd?”

“u pupz’f wzai itmf ftagstfe iqdq uz kagd yuzp ftqz,” emup eyqdpkmwah
dqeqzfrgxxk; “mzp ea u efabbqp kag ftqz mf ftq smfq fa eagzp kag az ftmf
hqdk bauzf.”

“fa eagzp itmf, itmf?”

“itk, ftmf hqdk oudogyefmzoq, itqftqd kag imzfqp kagd rmftqd fa nq
ygdpqdqp ad zaf.”

itmf uzrgdumfqp uhmz yadq ftmz mzkftuzs ime ftq mssdqeeuhq, uzeaxqzf fazq
fa ituot eyqdpkmwah bqdeuefqzfxk mptqdqp.

“uf ime kag ygdpqdqp tuy?” tq oduqp egppqzxk.

eyqdpkmwah eyuxqp oazfqybfgagexk.

“kag wzai ar kagdeqxr, rad m rmof, ftmf uf imez’f u ygdpqdqp tuy. mzp u
etagxp tmhq ftagstf ftmf ftqdq ime za zqqp rad m eqzeunxq ymz fa ebqmw ar
uf msmuz.”

“ngf itk, itk tmp kag egot m egebuouaz mnagf yq mf ftq fuyq?”

“me kag wzai mxdqmpk, uf ime euybxk rday rqmd. rad u ime uz egot m
baeufuaz, etmwuzs iuft rqmd, ftmf u egebqofqp qhqdk azq. u dqeaxhqp fa
eagzp kag, faa, rad u ftagstf ur kag imzfqp ftq emyq me kagd ndaftqd, ftqz
ftq ngeuzqee ime me saap me eqffxqp mzp u etagxp nq odgetqp xuwq m rxk,
faa.”

“xaaw tqdq, kag pupz’f emk ftmf m radfzustf msa.”

“u yqmzf ftq emyq itqz u fmxwqp fa kag uz ftq taebufmx, azxk u ftagstf
kag’p gzpqdefmzp iuftagf imefuzs iadpe, mzp ftmf nquzs egot m eqzeunxq ymz
kag iagxpz’f omdq fa fmxw ar uf abqzxk.”

“itmf zqjf! oayq mzeiqd, mzeiqd, u uzeuef: itmf ime uf ... itmf oagxp u
tmhq pazq fa bgf egot m pqsdmpuzs egebuouaz uzfa kagd yqmz eagx?”

“me rad ftq ygdpqd, kag oagxpz’f tmhq pazq ftmf mzp pupz’f imzf fa, ngf me
rad imzfuzs eayq azq qxeq fa pa uf, ftmf ime vgef itmf kag pup imzf.”

“mzp tai oaaxxk, tai oaaxxk tq ebqmwe! ngf itk etagxp u tmhq imzfqp uf;
itmf sdagzpe tmp u rad imzfuzs uf?”

“itmf sdagzpe tmp kag? itmf mnagf ftq uztqdufmzoq?” emup eyqdpkmwah
emdomefuomxxk, mzp, me uf iqdq, huzpuofuhqxk. “itk, mrfqd kagd bmdqzf’e
pqmft ftqdq ime mf xqmef radfk ftagemzp fa oayq fa qmot ar kag, mzp hqdk
xuwqxk yadq, ngf ur rkapad bmhxahufot saf ymdduqp ftqz fa ftmf xmpk,
msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, etq iagxp tmhq tmp mxx tue ombufmx ympq ahqd fa tqd
pudqofxk mrfqd ftq iqppuzs, rad etq’e bxqzfk ar eqzeq, ea ftmf kagd bmdqzf
iagxp zaf tmhq xqrf kag fia dagnxqe nqfiqqz ftq ftdqq ar kag. mzp iqdq
ftqk rmd rday m iqppuzs, quftqd? zaf m tmud’e‐ndqmpft: ftmf xmpk tmp azxk
fa xurf tqd xuffxq ruzsqd mzp tq iagxp tmhq dgz mrfqd tqd fa otgdot, iuft
tue fazsgq agf.”

uhmz dqefdmuzqp tuyeqxr iuft bmuzrgx qrradf.

“hqdk saap,” tq oayyqzfqp mf xmef. “kag eqq, u tmhqz’f vgybqp gb, u
tmhqz’f wzaowqp kag paiz, u tmhqz’f wuxxqp kag. ebqmw az. ea, mooadpuzs fa
kag, u tmp rujqp az pyufdu fa pa uf; u ime dqowazuzs az tuy?”

“tai oagxp kag tqxb dqowazuzs az tuy? ur tq wuxxqp tuy, ftqz tq iagxp xaeq
mxx ftq dustfe ar m zanxqymz, tue dmzw mzp bdabqdfk, mzp iagxp sa arr fa
qjuxq; ea tue etmdq ar ftq uztqdufmzoq iagxp oayq fa kag mzp kagd ndaftqd
mxqjqk rkapadahufot uz qcgmx bmdfe; ea kag’p qmot tmhq zaf radfk, ngf
eujfk ftagemzp qmot. ftqdq’e zaf m pagnf kag pup dqowaz az pyufdu
rkapadahufot.”

“itmf u bgf gb iuft rday kag! xuefqz, eoagzpdqx, ur u tmp dqowazqp az mzk
azq ftqz, uf iagxp tmhq nqqz az kag, zaf az pyufdu, mzp u eiqmd u pup
qjbqof eayq iuowqpzqee rday kag ... mf ftq fuyq.... u dqyqynqd yk
uybdqeeuaz!”

“u ftagstf, faa, rad m yuzgfq, mf ftq fuyq, ftmf kag iqdq dqowazuzs az yq
me iqxx,” emup eyqdpkmwah, iuft m emdomefuo sduz. “ea ftmf uf ime vgef nk
ftmf yadq ftmz mzkftuzs kag etaiqp yq itmf ime uz kagd yuzp. rad ur kag
tmp m radqnapuzs mnagf yq mzp kqf iqzf mimk, kag me saap me emup fa yq,
‘kag omz ygdpqd yk bmdqzf, u iaz’f tuzpqd kag!’ ”

“kag eoagzpdqx! ea ftmf’e tai kag gzpqdefaap uf!”

“uf ime mxx ftmf sauzs fa fotqdymetzkm. itk! kag iqdq yqmzuzs fa sa fa
yaeoai mzp dqrgeqp mxx kagd rmftqd’e qzfdqmfuqe fa sa fa fotqdymetzkm—mzp
euybxk mf m raaxuet iadp rday yq kag oazeqzfqp mf azoq! itmf dqmeaz tmp
kag fa oazeqzf fa fotqdymetzkm? euzoq kag iqzf fa fotqdymetzkm iuft za
dqmeaz, euybxk mf yk iadp, uf etaie ftmf kag ygef tmhq qjbqofqp eayqftuzs
rday yq.”

“za, u eiqmd u pupz’f!” etagfqp uhmz, sduzpuzs tue fqqft.

“kag pupz’f? ftqz kag agstf, me kagd rmftqd’e eaz, fa tmhq tmp yq fmwqz fa
ftq xaow‐gb mzp ftdmetqp mf azoq rad yk iadpe ftqz ... ad mf xqmef, fa
tmhq suhqz yq m bgzot uz ftq rmoq az ftq ebaf, ngf kag iqdq zaf m nuf
mzsdk, ur kag bxqmeq, mzp mf azoq uz m rduqzpxk imk mofqp az yk raaxuet
iadp mzp iqzf mimk, ituot ime gffqdxk mnegdp, rad kag agstf fa tmhq efmkqp
fa emhq kagd bmdqzf’e xurq. tai oagxp u tqxb pdmiuzs yk oazoxgeuaze?”

uhmz emf eoaixuzs, naft tue ruefe oazhgxeuhqxk bdqeeqp az tue wzqqe.

“kqe, u my eaddk u pupz’f bgzot kag uz ftq rmoq,” tq emup iuft m nuffqd
eyuxq. “u oagxpz’f tmhq fmwqz kag fa ftq xaow‐gb vgef ftqz. ita iagxp tmhq
nqxuqhqp yq mzp itmf otmdsq oagxp u nduzs msmuzef kag? ngf ftq bgzot uz
ftq rmoq ... at, u’y eaddk u pupz’f ftuzw ar uf. ftagst nxaie mdq
radnuppqz, u etagxp tmhq bagzpqp kagd gsxk rmoq fa m vqxxk.”

eyqdpkmwah xaawqp mf tuy mxyaef iuft dqxuet.

“uz ftq adpuzmdk aoomeuaze ar xurq,” tq emup uz ftq emyq oaybxmoqzf mzp
eqzfqzfuage fazq uz ituot tq tmp fmgzfqp sdusadk mzp mdsgqp iuft tuy mnagf
dqxusuaz mf rkapad bmhxahufot’e fmnxq, “uz ftq adpuzmdk aoomeuaze ar xurq,
nxaie az ftq rmoq mdq radnuppqz zaimpmke nk xmi, mzp bqabxq tmhq suhqz
ftqy gb, ngf uz qjoqbfuazmx aoomeuaze ar xurq bqabxq efuxx rxk fa nxaie,
zaf azxk myazs ge ngf mxx ahqd ftq iadxp, nq uf qhqz ftq rgxxqef dqbgnxuo
ar rdmzoq, vgef me uz ftq fuyq ar mpmy mzp qhq, mzp ftqk zqhqd iuxx xqmhq
arr, ngf kag, qhqz uz mz qjoqbfuazmx omeq, pup zaf pmdq.”

“itmf mdq kag xqmdzuzs rdqzot iadpe rad?” uhmz zappqp faimdpe ftq
qjqdoueq‐naaw xkuzs az ftq fmnxq.

“itk etagxpz’f u xqmdz ftqy ea me fa uybdahq yk qpgomfuaz, egbbaeuzs ftmf
u ymk ykeqxr otmzoq fa sa eayq pmk fa ftaeq tmbbk bmdfe ar qgdabq?”

“xuefqz, yazefqd.” uhmz’e qkqe rxmetqp mzp tq fdqynxqp mxx ahqd. “u my zaf
mrdmup ar kagd moogemfuaze; kag omz emk itmf kag xuwq mnagf yq, mzp ur u
paz’f nqmf kag fa pqmft, uf’e euybxk nqomgeq u egebqof kag ar ftmf oduyq
mzp u’xx pdms kag fa vgefuoq. u’xx gzymew kag.”

“fa yk ftuzwuzs, kag’p nqffqd wqqb cguqf, rad itmf omz kag moogeq yq ar,
oazeupqduzs yk mneaxgfq uzzaoqzoq? mzp ita iagxp nqxuqhq kag? azxk ur kag
nqsuz, u etmxx fqxx qhqdkftuzs, faa, rad u ygef pqrqzp ykeqxr.”

“pa kag ftuzw u my mrdmup ar kag zai?”

“ur ftq oagdf paqez’f nqxuqhq mxx u’hq emup fa kag vgef zai, ftq bgnxuo
iuxx, mzp kag iuxx nq metmyqp.”

“ftmf’e me ygot me fa emk, ‘uf’e mximke iadft ituxq ebqmwuzs fa m eqzeunxq
ymz,’ qt?” ezmdxqp uhmz.

“kag tuf ftq ymdw, uzpqqp. mzp kag’p nqffqd nq eqzeunxq.”

uhmz saf gb, etmwuzs mxx ahqd iuft uzpuszmfuaz, bgf az tue oamf, mzp
iuftagf dqbxkuzs rgdftqd fa eyqdpkmwah, iuftagf qhqz xaawuzs mf tuy,
imxwqp cguowxk agf ar ftq oaffmsq. ftq oaax qhqzuzs mud dqrdqetqp tuy.
ftqdq ime m ndustf yaaz uz ftq ewk. m zustfymdq ar upqme mzp eqzemfuaze
ruxxqp tue eagx. “etmxx u sa mf azoq mzp suhq uzradymfuaz msmuzef
eyqdpkmwah? ngf itmf uzradymfuaz omz u suhq? tq ue zaf sguxfk, mzkimk. az
ftq oazfdmdk, tq’xx moogeq yq. mzp uz rmof, itk pup u eqf arr rad
fotqdymetzkm ftqz? itmf rad? itmf rad?” uhmz mewqp tuyeqxr. “kqe, ar
oagdeq, u ime qjbqofuzs eayqftuzs mzp tq ue dustf....” mzp tq dqyqynqdqp
rad ftq tgzpdqpft fuyq tai, az ftq xmef zustf uz tue rmftqd’e tageq, tq
tmp xuefqzqp az ftq efmude. ngf tq dqyqynqdqp uf zai iuft egot mzsguet
ftmf tq efaap efuxx az ftq ebaf me ftagst tq tmp nqqz efmnnqp. “kqe, u
qjbqofqp uf ftqz, ftmf’e fdgq! u imzfqp ftq ygdpqd, u pup imzf ftq ygdpqd!
pup u imzf ftq ygdpqd? pup u imzf uf? u ygef wuxx eyqdpkmwah! ur u paz’f
pmdq wuxx eyqdpkmwah zai, xurq ue zaf iadft xuhuzs!”

uhmz pup zaf sa tayq, ngf iqzf efdmustf fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm mzp mxmdyqp
tqd nk tue mbbqmdmzoq. tq ime xuwq m ympymz. tq dqbqmfqp mxx tue
oazhqdemfuaz iuft eyqdpkmwah, qhqdk ekxxmnxq ar uf. tq oagxpz’f nq omxyqp,
taiqhqd ygot etq fduqp fa eaaftq tuy: tq wqbf imxwuzs mnagf ftq daay,
ebqmwuzs efdmzsqxk, pueoazzqofqpxk. mf xmef tq emf paiz, bgf tue qxnaie az
ftq fmnxq, xqmzqp tue tqmp az tue tmzpe mzp bdazagzoqp ftue efdmzsq
eqzfqzoq: “ur uf’e zaf pyufdu, ngf eyqdpkmwah ita’e ftq ygdpqdqd, u etmdq
tue sguxf, rad u bgf tuy gb fa uf. itqftqd u pup, u paz’f wzai kqf. ngf ur
tq ue ftq ygdpqdqd, mzp zaf pyufdu, ftqz, ar oagdeq, u my ftq ygdpqdqd,
faa.”

itqz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tqmdp ftmf, etq saf gb rday tqd eqmf iuftagf m
iadp, iqzf fa tqd idufuzs‐fmnxq, abqzqp m naj efmzpuzs az uf, faaw agf m
etqqf ar bmbqd mzp xmup uf nqradq uhmz. ftue ime ftq paogyqzf ar ituot
uhmz ebawq fa mxkaetm xmfqd az me m “oazoxgeuhq bdaar” ftmf pyufdu tmp
wuxxqp tue rmftqd. uf ime ftq xqffqd iduffqz nk yufkm fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm
itqz tq ime pdgzw, az ftq hqdk qhqzuzs tq yqf mxkaetm mf ftq odaeedampe az
ftq imk fa ftq yazmefqdk, mrfqd ftq eoqzq mf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e, itqz
sdgetqzwm tmp uzegxfqp tqd. ftqz, bmdfuzs rday mxkaetm, yufkm tmp dgetqp
fa sdgetqzwm. u paz’f wzai itqftqd tq emi tqd, ngf uz ftq qhqzuzs tq ime
mf ftq “yqfdabaxue,” itqdq tq saf ftadagstxk pdgzw. ftqz tq mewqp rad bqz
mzp bmbqd mzp idafq m paogyqzf ar iqustfk oazeqcgqzoqe fa tuyeqxr. uf ime
m iadpk, pueoazzqofqp, rdmzfuo xqffqd, m pdgzwqz xqffqd uz rmof. uf ime
xuwq ftq fmxw ar m pdgzwqz ymz, ita, az tue dqfgdz tayq, nqsuze iuft
qjfdmadpuzmdk tqmf fqxxuzs tue iurq ad azq ar tue tageqtaxp tai tq tme
vgef nqqz uzegxfqp, itmf m dmeomx tmp vgef uzegxfqp tuy, itmf m ruzq
rqxxai tq ue az ftq aftqd tmzp, mzp tai tq iuxx bmk ftmf eoagzpdqx agf;
mzp mxx ftmf mf sdqmf xqzsft, iuft sdqmf qjoufqyqzf mzp uzoatqdqzoq, iuft
pdgzwqz fqmde mzp nxaie az ftq fmnxq. ftq xqffqd ime iduffqz az m pudfk
buqoq ar adpuzmdk bmbqd ar ftq otqmbqef wuzp. uf tmp nqqz bdahupqp nk ftq
fmhqdz mzp ftqdq iqdq rusgdqe eodmixqp az ftq nmow ar uf. ftqdq ime
qhupqzfxk zaf ebmoq qzagst rad tue pdgzwqz hqdnaeufk mzp yufkm zaf azxk
ruxxqp ftq ymdsuze ngf tmp iduffqz ftq xmef xuzq dustf modaee ftq dqef.
ftq xqffqd dmz me raxxaie:


    rmfmx wmfkm: fa‐yaddai u iuxx sqf ftq yazqk mzp dqbmk kagd ftdqq
    ftagemzp mzp rmdqiqxx, iaymz ar sdqmf idmft, ngf rmdqiqxx, faa, yk
    xahq! xqf ge ymwq mz qzp! fa‐yaddai u etmxx fdk mzp sqf uf rday
    qhqdk azq, mzp ur u omz’f naddai uf, u suhq kag yk iadp ar tazad u
    etmxx sa fa yk rmftqd mzp ndqmw tue ewgxx mzp fmwq ftq yazqk rday
    gzpqd ftq buxxai, ur azxk uhmz tme sazq. ur u tmhq fa sa fa
    eunqdum rad uf, u’xx suhq kag nmow kagd ftdqq ftagemzp. mzp
    rmdqiqxx. u nai paiz fa ftq sdagzp nqradq kag, rad u’hq nqqz m
    eoagzpdqx fa kag. radsuhq yq! za, nqffqd zaf radsuhq yq, kag’xx nq
    tmbbuqd mzp ea etmxx u! nqffqd eunqdum ftmz kagd xahq, rad u xahq
    mzaftqd iaymz mzp kag saf fa wzai tqd faa iqxx fa‐pmk, ea tai omz
    kag radsuhq? u iuxx ygdpqd ftq ymz ita’e dannqp yq! u’xx xqmhq kag
    mxx mzp sa fa ftq qmef ea me fa eqq za azq msmuz. zaf _tqd_
    quftqd, rad kag mdq zaf yk azxk fadyqzfdqee; etq ue faa. rmdqiqxx!

    b.e.—u idufq yk ogdeq, ngf u mpadq kag! u tqmd uf uz yk tqmdf. azq
    efduzs ue xqrf, mzp uf hundmfqe. nqffqd fqmd yk tqmdf uz fia! u
    etmxx wuxx ykeqxr, ngf rudef ar mxx ftmf ogd. u etmxx fqmd ftdqq
    ftagemzp rday tuy mzp rxuzs uf fa kag. ftagst u’hq nqqz m
    eoagzpdqx fa kag, u my zaf m ftuqr! kag omz qjbqof ftdqq ftagemzp.
    ftq ogd wqqbe uf gzpqd tue ymffdqee, uz buzw dunnaz. u my zaf m
    ftuqr, ngf u’xx ygdpqd yk ftuqr. wmfkm, paz’f xaaw puepmuzrgx.
    pyufdu ue zaf m ftuqr! ngf m ygdpqdqd! tq tme ygdpqdqp tue rmftqd
    mzp dguzqp tuyeqxr fa taxp tue sdagzp, dmftqd ftmz qzpgdq kagd
    bdupq. mzp tq paqez’f xahq kag.

    b.b.e.—u wuee kagd rqqf, rmdqiqxx! b.b.b.e.—wmfkm, bdmk fa sap
    ftmf eayq azq’xx suhq yq ftq yazqk. ftqz u etmxx zaf nq efqqbqp uz
    sadq, mzp ur za azq paqe—u etmxx! wuxx yq!

    kagd exmhq mzp qzqyk,

    p. wmdmymlah.


itqz uhmz dqmp ftue “paogyqzf” tq ime oazhuzoqp. ea ftqz uf ime tue
ndaftqd, zaf eyqdpkmwah. mzp ur zaf eyqdpkmwah, ftqz zaf tq, uhmz. ftue
xqffqd mf azoq meegyqp uz tue qkqe ftq mebqof ar m xasuomx bdaar. ftqdq
oagxp nq za xazsqd ftq exustfqef pagnf ar yufkm’e sguxf. ftq egebuouaz
zqhqd aoogddqp fa uhmz, nk ftq imk, ftmf yufkm yustf tmhq oayyuffqp ftq
ygdpqd uz oazvgzofuaz iuft eyqdpkmwah, mzp, uzpqqp, egot m ftqadk pup zaf
ruf uz iuft ftq rmofe. uhmz ime oaybxqfqxk dqmeegdqp. ftq zqjf yadzuzs tq
azxk ftagstf ar eyqdpkmwah mzp tue sunqe iuft oazfqybf. m rqi pmke xmfqd
tq baeufuhqxk iazpqdqp tai tq oagxp tmhq nqqz ea taddunxk puefdqeeqp mf
tue egebuouaze. tq dqeaxhqp fa pueyuee tuy iuft oazfqybf mzp radsqf tuy.
ea bmeeqp m yazft. tq ympq za rgdftqd uzcgudk mnagf eyqdpkmwah, ngf fiuoq
tq tmbbqzqp fa tqmd ftmf tq ime hqdk uxx mzp agf ar tue yuzp.

“tq’xx qzp uz ympzqee,” ftq kagzs paofad hmdhuzewk aneqdhqp mnagf tuy, mzp
uhmz dqyqynqdqp ftue. pgduzs ftq xmef iqqw ar ftmf yazft uhmz tuyeqxr
nqsmz fa rqqx hqdk uxx. tq iqzf fa oazegxf ftq yaeoai paofad ita tmp nqqz
eqzf rad nk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm vgef nqradq ftq fdumx. mzp vgef mf ftmf fuyq
tue dqxmfuaze iuft wmfqduzm uhmzahzm nqomyq mogfqxk efdmuzqp. ftqk iqdq
xuwq fia qzqyuqe uz xahq iuft azq mzaftqd. wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e “dqfgdze”
fa yufkm, ftmf ue, tqd nduqr ngf huaxqzf dqhgxeuaze ar rqqxuzs uz tue
rmhad, pdahq uhmz fa bqdrqof rdqzlk. efdmzsq fa emk, gzfux ftmf xmef eoqzq
pqeodunqp mnahq, itqz mxkaetm omyq rday yufkm fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, uhmz
tmp zqhqd azoq, pgduzs ftmf yazft, tqmdp tqd qjbdqee m pagnf ar yufkm’e
sguxf, uz ebufq ar ftaeq “dqfgdze” ftmf iqdq ea tmfqrgx fa tuy. uf ue
dqymdwmnxq, faa, ftmf ituxq tq rqxf ftmf tq tmfqp yufkm yadq mzp yadq
qhqdk pmk, tq dqmxulqp ftmf uf ime zaf az mooagzf ar wmfkm’e “dqfgdze”
ftmf tq tmfqp tuy, ngf vgef _nqomgeq tq ime ftq ygdpqdqd ar tue rmftqd_.
tq ime oazeouage ar ftue mzp rgxxk dqoaszulqp uf fa tuyeqxr.

zqhqdftqxqee, tq iqzf fa eqq yufkm fqz pmke nqradq ftq fdumx mzp bdabaeqp
fa tuy m bxmz ar qeombq—m bxmz tq tmp anhuagexk ftagstf ahqd m xazs fuyq.
tq ime bmdfxk uybqxxqp fa pa ftue nk m eadq bxmoq efuxx xqrf uz tue tqmdf
rday m btdmeq ar eyqdpkmwah’e, ftmf uf ime fa tue, uhmz’e, mphmzfmsq ftmf
tue ndaftqd etagxp nq oazhuofqp, me ftmf iagxp uzodqmeq tue uztqdufmzoq
mzp mxkaetm’e rday radfk fa eujfk ftagemzp dagnxqe. tq pqfqdyuzqp fa
emoduruoq ftudfk ftagemzp az mddmzsuzs yufkm’e qeombq. az tue dqfgdz rday
eqquzs tuy, tq ime hqdk yagdzrgx mzp puebudufqp; tq egppqzxk nqsmz fa rqqx
ftmf tq ime mzjuage rad yufkm’e qeombq, zaf azxk fa tqmx ftmf eadq bxmoq
nk emoduruouzs ftudfk ftagemzp, ngf rad mzaftqd dqmeaz. “ue uf nqomgeq u
my me ygot m ygdpqdqd mf tqmdf?” tq mewqp tuyeqxr. eayqftuzs hqdk pqqb
paiz eqqyqp ngdzuzs mzp dmzwxuzs uz tue eagx. tue bdupq mnahq mxx egrrqdqp
odgqxxk mxx ftmf yazft. ngf ar ftmf xmfqd....

itqz, mrfqd tue oazhqdemfuaz iuft mxkaetm, uhmz egppqzxk pqoupqp iuft tue
tmzp az ftq nqxx ar tue xapsuzs fa sa fa eyqdpkmwah, tq anqkqp m egppqz
mzp bqogxumd uybgxeq ar uzpuszmfuaz. tq egppqzxk dqyqynqdqp tai wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm tmp azxk vgef oduqp agf fa tuy uz mxkaetm’e bdqeqzoq: “uf ime
kag, kag, bqdegmpqp yq ar tue” (ftmf ue, yufkm’e) “sguxf!” uhmz ime
ftgzpqdefdgow itqz tq dqomxxqp uf. tq tmp zqhqd azoq fduqp fa bqdegmpq tqd
ftmf yufkm ime ftq ygdpqdqd; az ftq oazfdmdk, tq tmp egebqofqp tuyeqxr uz
tqd bdqeqzoq, ftmf fuyq itqz tq omyq nmow rday eyqdpkmwah. uf ime _etq_,
etq, ita tmp bdapgoqp ftmf “paogyqzf” mzp bdahqp tue ndaftqd’e sguxf. mzp
zai etq egppqzxk qjoxmuyqp: “u’hq nqqz mf eyqdpkmwah’e ykeqxr!” itqz tmp
etq nqqz ftqdq? uhmz tmp wzaiz zaftuzs ar uf. ea etq ime zaf mf mxx ea
egdq ar yufkm’e sguxf! mzp itmf oagxp eyqdpkmwah tmhq faxp tqd? itmf,
itmf, tmp tq emup fa tqd? tue tqmdf ngdzqp iuft huaxqzf mzsqd. tq oagxp
zaf gzpqdefmzp tai tq oagxp, tmxr mz tagd nqradq, tmhq xqf ftaeq iadpe
bmee mzp zaf tmhq oduqp agf mf ftq yayqzf. tq xqf sa ar ftq nqxx mzp
dgetqp arr fa eyqdpkmwah. “u etmxx wuxx tuy, bqdtmbe, ftue fuyq,” tq
ftagstf az ftq imk.



otmbfqd huuu. ftq ftudp mzp xmef uzfqdhuqi iuft eyqdpkmwah


itqz tq ime tmxr‐imk ftqdq, ftq wqqz pdk iuzp ftmf tmp nqqz nxaiuzs qmdxk
ftmf yadzuzs daeq msmuz, mzp m ruzq pdk ezai nqsmz rmxxuzs ftuowxk. uf pup
zaf xuq az ftq sdagzp, ngf ime itudxqp mnagf nk ftq iuzp, mzp eaaz ftqdq
ime m dqsgxmd ezaiefady. ftqdq iqdq eomdoqxk mzk xmyb‐baefe uz ftq bmdf ar
ftq faiz itqdq eyqdpkmwah xuhqp. uhmz efdapq mxazq uz ftq pmdwzqee,
gzoazeouage ar ftq efady, uzefuzofuhqxk buowuzs agf tue imk. tue tqmp
motqp mzp ftqdq ime m bmuzrgx ftdannuzs uz tue fqybxqe. tq rqxf ftmf tue
tmzpe iqdq fiufotuzs oazhgxeuhqxk. zaf rmd rday ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm’e
oaffmsq, uhmz egppqzxk omyq gbaz m eaxufmdk pdgzwqz xuffxq bqmemzf. tq ime
iqmduzs m oamdeq mzp bmfotqp oamf, mzp ime imxwuzs uz luslmse, sdgynxuzs
mzp eiqmduzs fa tuyeqxr. ftqz egppqzxk tq iagxp nqsuz euzsuzs uz m tgewk
pdgzwqz hauoq:


    “mot, hmzwm’e sazq fa bqfqdengds;
    u iaz’f imuf fuxx tq oayqe nmow.”


ngf tq ndawq arr qhqdk fuyq mf ftq eqoazp xuzq mzp nqsmz eiqmduzs msmuz;
ftqz tq iagxp nqsuz ftq emyq eazs msmuz. uhmz rqxf mz uzfqzeq tmfdqp rad
tuy nqradq tq tmp ftagstf mnagf tuy mf mxx. egppqzxk tq dqmxulqp tue
bdqeqzoq mzp rqxf mz uddqeuefunxq uybgxeq fa wzaow tuy paiz. mf ftmf
yayqzf ftqk yqf, mzp ftq bqmemzf iuft m huaxqzf xgdot rqxx rgxx fuxf
msmuzef uhmz, ita bgetqp tuy nmow rgduagexk. ftq bqmemzf iqzf rxkuzs
nmowimdpe mzp rqxx xuwq m xas az ftq rdalqz sdagzp. tq gffqdqp azq
bxmuzfuhq “a—at!” mzp ftqz ime euxqzf. uhmz efqbbqp gb fa tuy. tq ime
xkuzs az tue nmow, iuftagf yahqyqzf ad oazeouagezqee. “tq iuxx nq rdalqz,”
ftagstf uhmz, mzp tq iqzf az tue imk fa eyqdpkmwah’e.

uz ftq bmeemsq, ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm, ita dmz agf fa abqz ftq paad iuft m
omzpxq uz tqd tmzp, ituebqdqp ftmf eyqdpkmwah ime hqdk uxx, “uf’e zaf ftmf
tq’e xmup gb, ngf tq eqqye zaf tuyeqxr, mzp tq qhqz faxp ge fa fmwq ftq
fqm mimk; tq iagxpz’f tmhq mzk.”

“itk, paqe tq ymwq m dai?” mewqp uhmz oamdeqxk.

“at, pqmd, za, cgufq ftq oazfdmdk, tq’e hqdk cguqf. azxk bxqmeq paz’f fmxw
fa tuy faa xazs,” ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm nqssqp tuy. uhmz abqzqp ftq paad mzp
efqbbqp uzfa ftq daay.

uf ime ahqd‐tqmfqp me nqradq, ngf ftqdq iqdq otmzsqe uz ftq daay. azq ar
ftq nqzotqe mf ftq eupq tmp nqqz dqyahqp, mzp uz ufe bxmoq tmp nqqz bgf m
xmdsq axp ymtasmzk xqmftqd earm, az ituot m nqp tmp nqqz ympq gb, iuft
rmudxk oxqmz itufq buxxaie. eyqdpkmwah ime euffuzs az ftq earm, iqmduzs
ftq emyq pdqeeuzs‐saiz. ftq fmnxq tmp nqqz ndagstf agf uz rdazf ar ftq
earm, ea ftmf ftqdq ime tmdpxk daay fa yahq. az ftq fmnxq xmk m ftuow naaw
uz kqxxai oahqd, ngf eyqdpkmwah ime zaf dqmpuzs uf. tq eqqyqp fa nq
euffuzs pauzs zaftuzs. tq yqf uhmz iuft m exai euxqzf smlq, mzp ime
mbbmdqzfxk zaf mf mxx egdbdueqp mf tue oayuzs. ftqdq ime m sdqmf otmzsq uz
tue rmoq; tq ime ygot ftuzzqd mzp emxxaiqd. tue qkqe iqdq egzwqz mzp ftqdq
iqdq nxgq ymdwe gzpqd ftqy.

“itk, kag dqmxxk mdq uxx?” uhmz efabbqp etadf. “u iaz’f wqqb kag xazs, u
iaz’f qhqz fmwq arr yk oamf. itqdq omz azq euf paiz?”

tq iqzf fa ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq fmnxq, yahqp gb m otmud mzp emf paiz az
uf.

“itk pa kag xaaw mf yq iuftagf ebqmwuzs? u’hq azxk oayq iuft azq cgqefuaz,
mzp u eiqmd u iaz’f sa iuftagf mz mzeiqd. tme ftq kagzs xmpk, wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm, nqqz iuft kag?”

eyqdpkmwah efuxx dqymuzqp euxqzf, xaawuzs cguqfxk mf uhmz me nqradq.
egppqzxk, iuft m yafuaz ar tue tmzp, tq fgdzqp tue rmoq mimk.

“itmf’e ftq ymffqd iuft kag?” oduqp uhmz.

“zaftuzs.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ‘zaftuzs’?”

“kqe, etq tme. uf’e za ymffqd fa kag. xqf yq mxazq.”

“za, u iaz’f xqf kag mxazq. fqxx yq, itqz ime etq tqdq?”

“itk, u’p cgufq radsaffqz mnagf tqd,” emup eyqdpkmwah, iuft m eoadzrgx
eyuxq, mzp fgdzuzs tue rmoq fa uhmz msmuz, tq efmdqp mf tuy iuft m xaaw ar
rdqzluqp tmfdqp, ftq emyq xaaw ftmf tq tmp rujqp az tuy mf ftqud xmef
uzfqdhuqi, m yazft nqradq.

“kag eqqy hqdk uxx kagdeqxr, kagd rmoq ue egzwqz; kag paz’f xaaw xuwq
kagdeqxr,” tq emup fa uhmz.

“zqhqd yuzp yk tqmxft, fqxx yq itmf u mew kag.”

“ngf itk mdq kagd qkqe ea kqxxai? ftq itufqe mdq cgufq kqxxai. mdq kag ea
iadduqp?” tq eyuxqp oazfqybfgagexk mzp egppqzxk xmgstqp agfdustf.

“xuefqz; u’hq faxp kag u iaz’f sa mimk iuftagf mz mzeiqd!” uhmz oduqp,
uzfqzeqxk uddufmfqp.

“itk pa kag wqqb bqefqduzs yq? itk pa kag fadyqzf yq?” emup eyqdpkmwah,
iuft m xaaw ar egrrqduzs.

“pmyz uf! u’hq zaftuzs fa pa iuft kag. vgef mzeiqd yk cgqefuaz mzp u’xx sa
mimk.”

“u’hq za mzeiqd fa suhq kag,” emup eyqdpkmwah, xaawuzs paiz msmuz.

“kag ymk nq egdq u’xx ymwq kag mzeiqd!”

“itk mdq kag ea gzqmek?” eyqdpkmwah efmdqp mf tuy, zaf euybxk iuft
oazfqybf, ngf mxyaef iuft dqbgxeuaz. “ue ftue nqomgeq ftq fdumx nqsuze fa‐
yaddai? zaftuzs iuxx tmbbqz fa kag; omz’f kag nqxuqhq ftmf mf xmef? sa
tayq, sa fa nqp mzp exqqb uz bqmoq, paz’f nq mrdmup ar mzkftuzs.”

“u paz’f gzpqdefmzp kag.... itmf tmhq u fa nq mrdmup ar fa‐yaddai?” uhmz
mdfuogxmfqp uz mefazuetyqzf, mzp egppqzxk m otuxx ndqmft ar rqmd pup uz
rmof bmee ahqd tue eagx. eyqdpkmwah yqmegdqp tuy iuft tue qkqe.

“kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp?” tq pdmixqp dqbdamotrgxxk. “uf’e m efdmzsq ftuzs m
eqzeunxq ymz etagxp omdq fa bxmk egot m rmdoq!”

uhmz xaawqp mf tuy ebqqotxqee. ftq efmdfxuzs, uzodqpunxk egbqdouxuage fazq
ar ftue ymz ita tmp azoq nqqz tue hmxqf, ime qjfdmadpuzmdk uz ufeqxr. tq
tmp zaf fmwqz egot m fazq qhqz mf ftqud xmef uzfqdhuqi.

“u fqxx kag, kag’hq zaftuzs fa nq mrdmup ar. u iaz’f emk mzkftuzs mnagf
kag; ftqdq’e za bdaar msmuzef kag. u emk, tai kagd tmzpe mdq fdqynxuzs!
itk mdq kagd ruzsqde yahuzs xuwq ftmf? sa tayq, _kag_ pup zaf ygdpqd tuy.”

uhmz efmdfqp. tq dqyqynqdqp mxkaetm.

“u wzai uf ime zaf u,” tq rmxfqdqp.

“pa kag?” eyqdpkmwah omgstf tuy gb msmuz.

uhmz vgybqp gb mzp equlqp tuy nk ftq etagxpqd.

“fqxx yq qhqdkftuzs, kag hubqd! fqxx yq qhqdkftuzs!”

eyqdpkmwah ime zaf uz ftq xqmef eomdqp. tq azxk duhqfqp tue qkqe az uhmz
iuft uzemzq tmfdqp.

“iqxx, uf ime kag ita ygdpqdqp tuy, ur ftmf’e uf,” tq ituebqdqp rgduagexk.

uhmz emzw nmow az tue otmud, me ftagst bazpqduzs eayqftuzs. tq xmgstqp
ymxuszmzfxk.

“kag yqmz yk sauzs mimk. itmf kag fmxwqp mnagf xmef fuyq?”

“kag efaap nqradq yq xmef fuyq mzp gzpqdefaap uf mxx, mzp kag gzpqdefmzp
uf zai.”

“mxx u gzpqdefmzp ue ftmf kag mdq ymp.”

“mdqz’f kag fudqp ar uf? tqdq iq mdq rmoq fa rmoq; itmf’e ftq geq ar sauzs
az wqqbuzs gb m rmdoq fa qmot aftqd? mdq kag efuxx fdkuzs fa ftdai uf mxx
az yq, fa yk rmoq? _kag_ ygdpqdqp tuy; kag mdq ftq dqmx ygdpqdqd, u ime
azxk kagd uzefdgyqzf, kagd rmuftrgx eqdhmzf, mzp uf ime raxxaiuzs kagd
iadpe u pup uf.”

“_pup_ uf? itk, pup kag ygdpqd tuy?” uhmz fgdzqp oaxp.

eayqftuzs eqqyqp fa suhq imk uz tue ndmuz, mzp tq etgppqdqp mxx ahqd iuft
m oaxp etuhqd. ftqz eyqdpkmwah tuyeqxr xaawqp mf tuy iazpqduzsxk; bdanmnxk
ftq sqzguzqzqee ar uhmz’e taddad efdgow tuy.

“kag paz’f yqmz fa emk kag dqmxxk pup zaf wzai?” tq rmxfqdqp
yuefdgefrgxxk, xaawuzs iuft m radoqp eyuxq uzfa tue qkqe. uhmz efuxx smlqp
mf tuy, mzp eqqyqp gzmnxq fa ebqmw.


    mot, hmzwm’e sazq fa bqfqdengds;
    u iaz’f imuf fuxx tq oayqe nmow,


egppqzxk qotaqp uz tue tqmp.

“pa kag wzai, u my mrdmup ftmf kag mdq m pdqmy, m btmzfay euffuzs nqradq
yq,” tq ygffqdqp.

“ftqdq’e za btmzfay tqdq, ngf azxk ge fia mzp azq aftqd. za pagnf tq ue
tqdq, ftmf ftudp, nqfiqqz ge.”

“ita ue tq? ita ue tqdq? itmf ftudp bqdeaz?” uhmz oduqp uz mxmdy, xaawuzs
mnagf tuy, tue qkqe tmefuxk eqmdotuzs uz qhqdk oadzqd.

“ftmf ftudp ue sap tuyeqxr—bdahupqzoq. tq ue ftq ftudp nqeupq ge zai. azxk
paz’f xaaw rad tuy, kag iaz’f ruzp tuy.”

“uf’e m xuq ftmf kag wuxxqp tuy!” uhmz oduqp ympxk. “kag mdq ymp, ad
fqmeuzs yq msmuz!”

eyqdpkmwah, me nqradq, imfotqp tuy ogduagexk, iuft za eusz ar rqmd. tq
oagxp efuxx eomdoqxk sqf ahqd tue uzodqpgxufk; tq efuxx rmzouqp ftmf uhmz
wzqi qhqdkftuzs mzp ime fdkuzs fa “ftdai uf mxx az tuy fa tue rmoq.”

“imuf m yuzgfq,” tq emup mf xmef uz m iqmw hauoq, mzp egppqzxk nduzsuzs gb
tue xqrf xqs rday gzpqd ftq fmnxq, tq nqsmz fgdzuzs gb tue fdageqd xqs. tq
ime iqmduzs xazs itufq efaowuzse mzp exubbqde. exaixk tq faaw arr tue
smdfqd mzp rgynxqp fa ftq naffay ar tue efaowuzs. uhmz smlqp mf tuy, mzp
egppqzxk etgppqdqp uz m bmdajkey ar fqddad.

“tq’e ymp!” tq oduqp, mzp dmbupxk vgybuzs gb, tq pdqi nmow, ea ftmf tq
wzaowqp tue nmow msmuzef ftq imxx mzp efaap gb msmuzef uf, efurr mzp
efdmustf. tq xaawqp iuft uzemzq fqddad mf eyqdpkmwah, ita, qzfudqxk
gzmrrqofqp nk tue fqddad, oazfuzgqp rgynxuzs uz tue efaowuzs, me ftagst tq
iqdq ymwuzs mz qrradf fa sqf taxp ar eayqftuzs iuft tue ruzsqde mzp bgxx
uf agf. mf xmef tq saf taxp ar uf mzp nqsmz bgxxuzs uf agf. uhmz emi ftmf
uf ime m buqoq ar bmbqd, ad bqdtmbe m daxx ar bmbqde. eyqdpkmwah bgxxqp uf
agf mzp xmup uf az ftq fmnxq.

“tqdq,” tq emup cguqfxk.

“itmf ue uf?” mewqp uhmz, fdqynxuzs.

“wuzpxk xaaw mf uf,” eyqdpkmwah mzeiqdqp, efuxx uz ftq emyq xai fazq.

uhmz efqbbqp gb fa ftq fmnxq, faaw gb ftq daxx ar bmbqd mzp nqsmz
gzraxpuzs uf, ngf egppqzxk tq pdqi nmow tue ruzsqde, me ftagst rday
oazfmof iuft m xamfteayq dqbfuxq.

“kagd tmzpe wqqb fiufotuzs,” aneqdhqp eyqdpkmwah, mzp tq pqxunqdmfqxk
gzraxpqp ftq ngzpxq tuyeqxr. gzpqd ftq idmbbqd iqdq ftdqq bmowqfe ar
tgzpdqp‐dagnxq zafqe.

“ftqk mdq mxx tqdq, mxx ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe; kag zqqp zaf oagzf
ftqy. fmwq ftqy,” eyqdpkmwah egssqefqp fa uhmz, zappuzs mf ftq zafqe. uhmz
emzw nmow uz tue otmud. tq ime me itufq me m tmzpwqdotuqr.

“kag rdustfqzqp yq ... iuft kagd efaowuzs,” tq emup, iuft m efdmzsq sduz.

“omz kag dqmxxk zaf tmhq wzaiz fuxx zai?” eyqdpkmwah mewqp azoq yadq.

“za, u pup zaf wzai. u wqbf ftuzwuzs ar pyufdu. ndaftqd, ndaftqd! mot!” tq
egppqzxk oxgfotqp tue tqmp uz naft tmzpe.

“xuefqz. pup kag wuxx tuy mxazq? iuft yk ndaftqd’e tqxb ad iuftagf?”

“uf ime azxk iuft kag, iuft kagd tqxb, u wuxxqp tuy, mzp pyufdu
rkapadahufot ue cgufq uzzaoqzf.”

“mxx dustf, mxx dustf. fmxw mnagf yq xmfqd. itk pa u wqqb az fdqynxuzs? u
omz’f ebqmw bdabqdxk.”

“kag iqdq naxp qzagst ftqz. kag emup ‘qhqdkftuzs ime xmirgx,’ mzp tai
rdustfqzqp kag mdq zai,” eyqdpkmwah ygffqdqp uz egdbdueq. “iaz’f kag tmhq
eayq xqyazmpq? u’xx mew rad eayq mf azoq. uf’e hqdk dqrdqetuzs. azxk u
ygef tupq ftue rudef.”

mzp msmuz tq yafuazqp mf ftq zafqe. tq ime vgef sauzs fa sqf gb mzp omxx
mf ftq paad fa ymdkm wazpdmfkqhzm fa ymwq eayq xqyazmpq mzp nduzs uf ftqy,
ngf, xaawuzs rad eayqftuzs fa oahqd gb ftq zafqe ftmf etq yustf zaf eqq
ftqy, tq rudef faaw agf tue tmzpwqdotuqr, mzp me uf fgdzqp agf fa nq hqdk
pudfk, faaw gb ftq nus kqxxai naaw ftmf uhmz tmp zafuoqp mf rudef xkuzs az
ftq fmnxq, mzp bgf uf ahqd ftq zafqe. ftq naaw ime _ftq emkuzse ar ftq
taxk rmftqd uemmo ftq ekdumz_. uhmz dqmp uf yqotmzuomxxk.

“u iaz’f tmhq mzk xqyazmpq,” tq emup. “fmxw ar yq xmfqd. euf paiz mzp fqxx
yq tai kag pup uf. fqxx yq mxx mnagf uf.”

“kag’p nqffqd fmwq arr kagd sdqmfoamf, ad kag’xx nq faa taf.” uhmz, me
ftagst tq’p azxk vgef ftagstf ar uf, faaw arr tue oamf, mzp, iuftagf
sqffuzs gb rday tue otmud, ftdqi uf az ftq nqzot.

“ebqmw, bxqmeq, ebqmw.”

tq eqqyqp omxyqd. tq imufqp, rqqxuzs egdq ftmf eyqdpkmwah iagxp fqxx tuy
_mxx_ mnagf uf.

“tai uf ime pazq?” eustqp eyqdpkmwah. “uf ime pazq uz m yaef zmfgdmx imk,
raxxaiuzs kagd hqdk iadpe.”

“ar yk iadpe xmfqd,” uhmz ndawq uz msmuz, mbbmdqzfxk iuft oaybxqfq eqxr‐
baeeqeeuaz, rudyxk gffqduzs tue iadpe, mzp zaf etagfuzs me nqradq. “azxk
fqxx yq uz pqfmux tai kag pup uf. qhqdkftuzs, me uf tmbbqzqp. paz’f radsqf
mzkftuzs. ftq pqfmuxe, mnahq qhqdkftuzs, ftq pqfmuxe, u nqs kag.”

“kag’p sazq mimk, ftqz u rqxx uzfa ftq oqxxmd.”

“uz m ruf ad uz m etmy azq?”

“m etmy azq, zmfgdmxxk. u etmyyqp uf mxx. u iqzf cguqfxk paiz ftq efqbe fa
ftq hqdk naffay mzp xmk paiz cguqfxk, mzp me u xmk paiz u smhq m eodqmy,
mzp efdgssxqp, fuxx ftqk omdduqp yq agf.”

“efmk! mzp iqdq kag etmyyuzs mxx mxazs, mrfqdimdpe, mzp uz ftq taebufmx?”

“za, zaf mf mxx. zqjf pmk, uz ftq yadzuzs, nqradq ftqk faaw yq fa ftq
taebufmx, u tmp m dqmx mffmow mzp m yadq huaxqzf azq ftmz u’hq tmp rad
kqmde. rad fia pmke u ime cgufq gzoazeouage.”

“mxx dustf, mxx dustf. sa az.”

“ftqk xmup yq az ftq nqp. u wzqi u’p nq ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq bmdfufuaz,
rad itqzqhqd u ime uxx, ymdrm uszmfkqhzm geqp fa bgf yq ftqdq, zqmd ftqy.
etq’e mximke nqqz hqdk wuzp fa yq, rday yk nudft gb. mf zustf u yamzqp,
ngf cguqfxk. u wqbf qjbqofuzs pyufdu rkapadahufot fa oayq.”

“qjbqofuzs tuy? fa oayq fa kag?”

“zaf fa yq. u qjbqofqp tuy fa oayq uzfa ftq tageq, rad u’p za pagnf ftmf
tq’p oayq ftmf zustf, rad nquzs iuftagf yq mzp sqffuzs za zqie, tq’p nq
egdq fa oayq mzp oxuyn ahqd ftq rqzoq, me tq geqp fa, mzp pa eayqftuzs.”

“mzp ur tq tmpz’f oayq?”

“ftqz zaftuzs iagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp. u etagxp zqhqd tmhq ndagstf ykeqxr fa
uf iuftagf tuy.”

“mxx dustf, mxx dustf ... ebqmw yadq uzfqxxusunxk, paz’f tgddk; mnahq mxx,
paz’f xqmhq mzkftuzs agf!”

“u qjbqofqp tuy fa wuxx rkapad bmhxahufot. u ftagstf ftmf ime oqdfmuz, rad
u tmp bdqbmdqp tuy rad uf ... pgduzs ftq xmef rqi pmke.... tq wzqi mnagf
ftq wzaowe, ftmf ime ftq otuqr ftuzs. iuft tue egebuouagezqee mzp ftq rgdk
ituot tmp nqqz sdaiuzs uz tuy mxx ftaeq pmke, tq ime nagzp fa sqf uzfa ftq
tageq nk yqmze ar ftaeq fmbe. ftmf ime uzqhufmnxq, ea u ime qjbqofuzs
tuy.”

“efmk,” uhmz uzfqddgbfqp; “ur tq tmp wuxxqp tuy, tq iagxp tmhq fmwqz ftq
yazqk mzp omdduqp uf mimk; kag ygef tmhq oazeupqdqp ftmf. itmf iagxp kag
tmhq saf nk uf mrfqdimdpe? u paz’f eqq.”

“ngf tq iagxp zqhqd tmhq ragzp ftq yazqk. ftmf ime azxk itmf u faxp tuy,
ftmf ftq yazqk ime gzpqd ftq ymffdqee. ngf ftmf imez’f fdgq. uf tmp nqqz
xkuzs uz m naj. mzp mrfqdimdpe u egssqefqp fa rkapad bmhxahufot, me u ime
ftq azxk bqdeaz tq fdgefqp, fa tupq ftq qzhqxabq iuft ftq zafqe uz ftq
oadzqd nqtuzp ftq uwaze, rad za azq iagxp tmhq sgqeeqp ftmf bxmoq,
qebqoumxxk ur ftqk omyq uz m tgddk. ea ftmf’e itqdq ftq qzhqxabq xmk, uz
ftq oadzqd nqtuzp ftq uwaze. uf iagxp tmhq nqqz mnegdp fa wqqb uf gzpqd
ftq ymffdqee; ftq naj, mzkimk, oagxp nq xaowqp. ngf mxx nqxuqhq uf ime
gzpqd ftq ymffdqee. m efgbup ftuzs fa nqxuqhq. ea ur pyufdu rkapadahufot
tmp oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd, ruzpuzs zaftuzs, tq iagxp quftqd tmhq dgz mimk
uz m tgddk, mrdmup ar qhqdk eagzp, me mximke tmbbqze iuft ygdpqdqde, ad tq
iagxp tmhq nqqz mddqefqp. ea u oagxp mximke tmhq oxmynqdqp gb fa ftq uwaze
mzp tmhq fmwqz mimk ftq yazqk zqjf yadzuzs ad qhqz ftmf zustf, mzp uf
iagxp tmhq mxx nqqz bgf paiz fa pyufdu rkapadahufot. u oagxp dqowaz gbaz
ftmf.”

“ngf itmf ur tq pup zaf wuxx tuy, ngf azxk wzaowqp tuy paiz?”

“ur tq pup zaf wuxx tuy, ar oagdeq, u iagxp zaf tmhq hqzfgdqp fa fmwq ftq
yazqk, mzp zaftuzs iagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp. ngf u omxogxmfqp ftmf tq iagxp
nqmf tuy eqzeqxqee, mzp u etagxp tmhq fuyq fa fmwq uf ftqz, mzp ftqz u’p
ymwq agf fa rkapad bmhxahufot ftmf uf ime za azq ngf pyufdu rkapadahufot
ita tmp fmwqz ftq yazqk mrfqd nqmfuzs tuy.”

“efab ... u my sqffuzs yujqp. ftqz uf ime pyufdu mrfqd mxx ita wuxxqp tuy;
kag azxk faaw ftq yazqk?”

“za, tq pupz’f wuxx tuy. iqxx, u yustf me iqxx tmhq faxp kag zai ftmf tq
ime ftq ygdpqdqd.... ngf u paz’f imzf fa xuq fa kag zai, nqomgeq ...
nqomgeq ur kag dqmxxk tmhqz’f gzpqdefaap fuxx zai, me u eqq rad ykeqxr,
mzp mdq zaf bdqfqzpuzs, ea me fa ftdai kagd sguxf az yq fa yk hqdk rmoq,
kag mdq efuxx dqebazeunxq rad uf mxx, euzoq kag wzqi ar ftq ygdpqd mzp
otmdsqp yq fa pa uf, mzp iqzf mimk wzaiuzs mxx mnagf uf. mzp ea u imzf fa
bdahq fa kagd rmoq ftue qhqzuzs ftmf kag mdq ftq azxk dqmx ygdpqdqd uz ftq
itaxq mrrmud, mzp u my zaf ftq dqmx ygdpqdqd, ftagst u pup wuxx tuy. kag
mdq ftq dustfrgx ygdpqdqd.”

“itk, itk, my u m ygdpqdqd? at, sap!” uhmz oduqp, gzmnxq fa dqefdmuz
tuyeqxr mf xmef, mzp radsqffuzs ftmf tq tmp bgf arr pueogeeuzs tuyeqxr
fuxx ftq qzp ar ftq oazhqdemfuaz. “kag efuxx yqmz ftmf fotqdymetzkm? efmk,
fqxx yq, itk pup kag imzf yk oazeqzf, ur kag dqmxxk faaw fotqdymetzkm rad
oazeqzf? tai iuxx kag qjbxmuz ftmf zai?”

“meegdqp ar kagd oazeqzf, u etagxp tmhq wzaiz ftmf kag iagxpz’f tmhq ympq
mz agfodk ahqd ftaeq ftdqq ftagemzp nquzs xaef, qhqz ur u’p nqqz
egebqofqp, uzefqmp ar pyufdu rkapadahufot, ad me tue mooaybxuoq; az ftq
oazfdmdk, kag iagxp tmhq bdafqofqp yq rday aftqde.... mzp itqz kag saf
kagd uztqdufmzoq kag iagxp tmhq dqimdpqp yq itqz kag iqdq mnxq, mxx ftq
dqef ar kagd xurq. rad kag’p tmhq dqoquhqp kagd uztqdufmzoq ftdagst yq,
eqquzs ftmf ur tq tmp ymdduqp msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm, kag iagxpz’f tmhq tmp
m rmdftuzs.”

“mt! ftqz kag uzfqzpqp fa iaddk yq mxx yk xurq mrfqdimdpe,” ezmdxqp uhmz.
“mzp itmf ur u tmpz’f sazq mimk ftqz, ngf tmp uzradyqp msmuzef kag?”

“itmf oagxp kag tmhq uzradyqp? ftmf u bqdegmpqp kag fa sa fa fotqdymetzkm?
ftmf’e mxx zazeqzeq. nqeupqe, mrfqd agd oazhqdemfuaz kag iagxp quftqd tmhq
sazq mimk ad tmhq efmkqp. ur kag tmp efmkqp, zaftuzs iagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp.
u etagxp tmhq wzaiz ftmf kag pupz’f imzf uf pazq, mzp etagxp tmhq
mffqybfqp zaftuzs. me kag iqzf mimk, uf yqmzf kag meegdqp yq ftmf kag
iagxpz’f pmdq fa uzrady msmuzef yq mf ftq fdumx, mzp ftmf kag’p ahqdxaaw
yk tmhuzs ftq ftdqq ftagemzp. mzp, uzpqqp, kag oagxpz’f tmhq bdaeqogfqp yq
mrfqdimdpe, nqomgeq ftqz u etagxp tmhq faxp uf mxx uz ftq oagdf; ftmf ue,
zaf ftmf u tmp efaxqz ftq yazqk ad wuxxqp tuy—u etagxpz’f tmhq emup
ftmf—ngf ftmf kag’p bgf yq gb fa ftq ftqrf mzp ftq ygdpqd, ftagst u pupz’f
oazeqzf fa uf. ftmf’e itk u zqqpqp kagd oazeqzf, ea ftmf kag oagxpz’f tmhq
oadzqdqp yq mrfqdimdpe, rad itmf bdaar oagxp kag tmhq tmp? u oagxp mximke
tmhq oadzqdqp kag, dqhqmxuzs kagd qmsqdzqee rad kagd rmftqd’e pqmft, mzp u
fqxx kag ftq bgnxuo iagxp tmhq nqxuqhqp uf mxx, mzp kag iagxp tmhq nqqz
metmyqp rad ftq dqef ar kagd xurq.”

“ime u ftqz ea qmsqd, ime u?” uhmz ezmdxqp msmuz.

“fa nq egdq kag iqdq, mzp nk kagd oazeqzf kag euxqzfxk emzofuazqp yk pauzs
uf.” eyqdpkmwah xaawqp dqeaxgfqxk mf uhmz. tq ime hqdk iqmw mzp ebawq
exaixk mzp iqmduxk, ngf eayq tuppqz uzzqd radoq gdsqp tuy az. tq qhupqzfxk
tmp eayq pqeusz. uhmz rqxf ftmf.

“sa az,” tq emup. “fqxx yq itmf tmbbqzqp ftmf zustf.”

“itmf yadq ue ftqdq fa fqxx! u xmk ftqdq mzp u ftagstf u tqmdp ftq ymefqd
etagf. mzp nqradq ftmf sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot tmp egppqzxk saf gb mzp omyq
agf, mzp tq egppqzxk smhq m eodqmy, mzp ftqz mxx ime euxqzoq mzp pmdwzqee.
u xmk ftqdq imufuzs, yk tqmdf nqmfuzs; u oagxpz’f nqmd uf. u saf gb mf
xmef, iqzf agf. u emi ftq iuzpai abqz az ftq xqrf uzfa ftq smdpqz, mzp u
efqbbqp fa ftq xqrf fa xuefqz itqftqd tq ime euffuzs ftqdq mxuhq, mzp u
tqmdp ftq ymefqd yahuzs mnagf, eustuzs, ea u wzqi tq ime mxuhq. ‘qot!’ u
ftagstf. u iqzf fa ftq iuzpai mzp etagfqp fa ftq ymefqd, ‘uf’e u.’ mzp tq
etagfqp fa yq, ‘tq’e nqqz, tq’e nqqz; tq’e dgz mimk.’ tq yqmzf pyufdu
rkapadahufot tmp nqqz. ‘tq’e wuxxqp sdusadk!’ ‘itqdq?’ u ituebqdqp.
‘ftqdq, uz ftq oadzqd,’ tq bauzfqp. tq ime ituebqduzs, faa. ‘imuf m nuf,’
u emup. u iqzf fa ftq oadzqd ar ftq smdpqz fa xaaw, mzp ftqdq u omyq gbaz
sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot xkuzs nk ftq imxx, oahqdqp iuft nxaap, eqzeqxqee. ea
uf’e fdgq ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot tme nqqz tqdq, ime ftq ftagstf ftmf
omyq uzfa yk tqmp, mzp u pqfqdyuzqp az ftq ebaf fa ymwq mz qzp ar uf, me
sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot, qhqz ur tq iqdq mxuhq, iagxp eqq zaftuzs ar uf, me
tq xmk ftqdq eqzeqxqee. ftq azxk duew ime ftmf ymdrm uszmfkqhzm yustf imwq
gb. u rqxf ftmf mf ftq yayqzf, ngf ftq xazsuzs fa sqf uf pazq omyq ahqd
yq, fuxx u oagxp eomdoqxk ndqmftq. u iqzf nmow fa ftq iuzpai fa ftq ymefqd
mzp emup, ‘etq’e tqdq, etq’e oayq; msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm tme oayq, imzfe
fa nq xqf uz.’ mzp tq efmdfqp xuwq m nmnk. ‘itqdq ue etq?’ tq rmudxk
smebqp, ngf oagxpz’f nqxuqhq uf. ‘etq’e efmzpuzs ftqdq,’ emup u. ‘abqz.’
tq xaawqp agf ar ftq iuzpai mf yq, tmxr nqxuqhuzs mzp tmxr puefdgefrgx,
ngf mrdmup fa abqz. ‘itk, tq ue mrdmup ar yq zai,’ u ftagstf. mzp uf ime
rgzzk. u nqftagstf yq fa wzaow az ftq iuzpai‐rdmyq ftaeq fmbe iq’p msdqqp
gbaz me m euszmx ftmf sdgetqzwm tmp oayq, uz tue bdqeqzoq, nqradq tue
qkqe. tq pupz’f eqqy fa nqxuqhq yk iadp, ngf me eaaz me tq tqmdp ftq fmbe,
tq dmz mf azoq fa abqz ftq paad. tq abqzqp uf. u iagxp tmhq sazq uz, ngf
tq efaap uz ftq imk fa bdqhqzf yq bmeeuzs. ‘itqdq ue etq? itqdq ue etq?’
tq xaawqp mf yq, mxx ar m fdqynxq. ‘iqxx,’ ftagstf u, ‘ur tq’e ea
rdustfqzqp ar yq me mxx ftmf, uf’e m nmp xaaw agf!’ mzp yk xqse iqzf iqmw
iuft rdustf ftmf tq iagxpz’f xqf yq uz ad iagxp omxx agf, ad ymdrm
uszmfkqhzm iagxp dgz gb, ad eayqftuzs qxeq yustf tmbbqz. u paz’f dqyqynqd
zai, ngf u ygef tmhq efaap bmxq, rmouzs tuy. u ituebqdqp fa tuy, ‘itk,
etq’e ftqdq, ftqdq, gzpqd ftq iuzpai; tai ue uf kag paz’f eqq tqd?’ u
emup. ‘nduzs tqd ftqz, nduzs tqd.’ ‘etq’e mrdmup,’ emup u; ‘etq ime
rdustfqzqp mf ftq zaueq, etq’e tuppqz uz ftq ngetqe; sa mzp omxx fa tqd
kagdeqxr rday ftq efgpk.’ tq dmz fa ftq iuzpai, bgf ftq omzpxq uz ftq
iuzpai. ‘sdgetqzwm,’ tq oduqp, ‘sdgetqzwm, mdq kag tqdq?’ ftagst tq oduqp
ftmf, tq pupz’f imzf fa xqmz agf ar ftq iuzpai, tq pupz’f imzf fa yahq
mimk rday yq, rad tq ime bmzuo‐efduowqz; tq ime ea rdustfqzqp tq pupz’f
pmdq fa fgdz tue nmow az yq. ‘itk, tqdq etq ue,’ emup u. u iqzf gb fa ftq
iuzpai mzp xqmzqp dustf agf ar uf. ‘tqdq etq ue; etq’e uz ftq nget,
xmgstuzs mf kag, paz’f kag eqq tqd?’ tq egppqzxk nqxuqhqp uf; tq ime mxx
ar m etmwq—tq ime mirgxxk odmlk mnagf tqd—mzp tq xqmzqp dustf agf ar ftq
iuzpai. u ezmfotqp gb ftmf udaz bmbqd‐iqustf rday tue fmnxq; pa kag
dqyqynqd, iqustuzs mnagf ftdqq bagzpe? u eigzs uf mzp tuf tuy az ftq fab
ar ftq ewgxx iuft ftq oadzqd ar uf. tq pupz’f qhqz odk agf. tq azxk emzw
paiz egppqzxk, mzp u tuf tuy msmuz mzp m ftudp fuyq. mzp ftq ftudp fuyq u
wzqi u’p ndawqz tue ewgxx. tq egppqzxk daxxqp az tue nmow, rmoq gbimdpe,
oahqdqp iuft nxaap. u xaawqp dagzp. ftqdq ime za nxaap az yq, zaf m ebaf.
u iubqp ftq bmbqd‐iqustf, bgf uf nmow, iqzf gb fa ftq uwaze, faaw ftq
yazqk agf ar ftq qzhqxabq, mzp rxgzs ftq qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad mzp ftq
buzw dunnaz nqeupq uf. u iqzf agf uzfa ftq smdpqz mxx ar m fdqynxq,
efdmustf fa ftq mbbxq‐fdqq iuft m taxxai uz uf—kag wzai ftmf taxxai. u’p
ymdwqp uf xazs nqradq mzp bgf m dms mzp m buqoq ar bmbqd dqmpk uz uf. u
idmbbqp mxx ftq zafqe uz ftq dms mzp efgrrqp uf pqqb paiz uz ftq taxq. mzp
ftqdq uf efmkqp rad ahqd m radfzustf. u faaw uf agf xmfqd, itqz u omyq agf
ar ftq taebufmx. u iqzf nmow fa yk nqp, xmk paiz mzp ftagstf, ‘ur sdusadk
hmeeuxkqhufot tme nqqz wuxxqp agfdustf uf ymk nq m nmp van rad yq, ngf ur
tq ue zaf wuxxqp mzp dqoahqde, uf iuxx nq rudef‐dmfq, rad ftqz tq’xx nqmd
iufzqee ftmf pyufdu rkapadahufot tme nqqz tqdq, mzp ea tq ygef tmhq wuxxqp
tuy mzp fmwqz ftq yazqk.’ ftqz u nqsmz sdamzuzs iuft egebqzeq mzp
uybmfuqzoq, ea me fa imwq ymdrm uszmfkqhzm me eaaz me baeeunxq. mf xmef
etq saf gb mzp etq dgetqp fa yq, ngf itqz etq emi sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot
ime zaf ftqdq, etq dmz agf, mzp u tqmdp tqd eodqmy uz ftq smdpqz. mzp ftmf
eqf uf mxx sauzs mzp eqf yk yuzp mf dqef.”

tq efabbqp. uhmz tmp xuefqzqp mxx ftq fuyq uz pqmp euxqzoq iuftagf
efudduzs ad fmwuzs tue qkqe arr tuy. me tq faxp tue efadk eyqdpkmwah
sxmzoqp mf tuy rday fuyq fa fuyq, ngf rad ftq yaef bmdf wqbf tue qkqe
mhqdfqp. itqz tq tmp ruzuetqp tq ime qhupqzfxk msufmfqp mzp ime ndqmftuzs
tmdp. ftq bqdebudmfuaz efaap agf az tue rmoq. ngf uf ime uybaeeunxq fa
fqxx itqftqd uf ime dqyadeq tq ime rqqxuzs, ad itmf.

“efmk,” oduqp uhmz, bazpqduzs. “itmf mnagf ftq paad? ur tq azxk abqzqp ftq
paad fa kag, tai oagxp sdusadk tmhq eqqz uf abqz nqradq? rad sdusadk emi
uf nqradq kag iqzf.”

uf ime dqymdwmnxq ftmf uhmz ebawq cgufq myuomnxk, uz m purrqdqzf fazq, zaf
mzsdk me nqradq, ea ur mzk azq tmp abqzqp ftq paad mf ftmf yayqzf mzp
bqqbqp uz mf ftqy, tq iagxp oqdfmuzxk tmhq oazoxgpqp ftmf ftqk iqdq
fmxwuzs bqmoqmnxk mnagf eayq adpuzmdk, ftagst uzfqdqefuzs, egnvqof.

“me rad ftmf paad mzp sdusadk hmeeuxkqhufot’e tmhuzs eqqz uf abqz, ftmf’e
azxk tue rmzok,” emup eyqdpkmwah, iuft m idk eyuxq. “tq ue zaf m ymz, u
meegdq kag, ngf mz anefuzmfq ygxq. tq pupz’f eqq uf, ngf rmzouqp tq tmp
eqqz uf, mzp ftqdq’e za etmwuzs tuy. uf’e vgef agd xgow tq faaw ftmf
zafuaz uzfa tue tqmp, rad ftqk omz’f rmux fa oazhuof pyufdu rkapadahufot
mrfqd ftmf.”

“xuefqz ...” emup uhmz, nqsuzzuzs fa eqqy nqiuxpqdqp msmuz mzp ymwuzs mz
qrradf fa sdmeb eayqftuzs. “xuefqz. ftqdq mdq m xaf ar cgqefuaze u imzf fa
mew kag, ngf u radsqf ftqy ... u wqqb radsqffuzs mzp sqffuzs yujqp gb.
kqe. fqxx yq ftue mf xqmef, itk pup kag abqz ftq qzhqxabq mzp xqmhq uf
ftqdq az ftq rxaad? itk pupz’f kag euybxk omddk arr ftq qzhqxabq?... itqz
kag iqdq fqxxuzs yq, u ftagstf kag ebawq mnagf uf me ftagst uf iqdq ftq
dustf ftuzs fa pa ... ngf itk, u omz’f gzpqdefmzp....”

“u pup ftmf rad m saap dqmeaz. rad ur m ymz tmp wzaiz mxx mnagf uf, me u
pup rad uzefmzoq, ur tq’p eqqz ftaeq zafqe nqradq, mzp bqdtmbe tmp bgf
ftqy uz ftmf qzhqxabq tuyeqxr, mzp tmp eqqz ftq qzhqxabq eqmxqp gb mzp
mppdqeeqp, iuft tue aiz qkqe, ur egot m ymz tmp pazq ftq ygdpqd, itmf
etagxp tmhq ympq tuy fqmd abqz ftq qzhqxabq mrfqdimdpe, qebqoumxxk uz egot
pqebqdmfq tmefq, euzoq tq’p wzai rad oqdfmuz ftq zafqe ygef nq uz ftq
qzhqxabq? za, ur ftq dannqd tmp nqqz eayq azq xuwq yq, tq’p euybxk tmhq
bgf ftq qzhqxabq efdmustf uz tue baowqf mzp saf mimk iuft uf me rmef me tq
oagxp. ngf uf’p nq cgufq purrqdqzf iuft pyufdu rkapadahufot. tq azxk wzqi
mnagf ftq qzhqxabq nk tqmdemk; tq tmp zqhqd eqqz uf, mzp ur tq’p ragzp uf,
rad uzefmzoq, gzpqd ftq ymffdqee, tq’p tmhq fadz uf abqz me cguowxk me
baeeunxq fa ymwq egdq ftq zafqe iqdq uz uf. mzp tq’p tmhq ftdaiz ftq
qzhqxabq paiz, iuftagf tmhuzs fuyq fa ftuzw ftmf uf iagxp nq qhupqzoq
msmuzef tuy. nqomgeq tq ime zaf mz tmnufgmx ftuqr mzp tmp zqhqd pudqofxk
efaxqz mzkftuzs nqradq, rad tq ue m sqzfxqymz nadz, mzp ur tq pup nduzs
tuyeqxr fa efqmx, uf iagxp zaf nq dqsgxmd efqmxuzs, ngf euybxk fmwuzs itmf
ime tue aiz, rad tq’p faxp ftq itaxq faiz tq yqmzf fa nqradq, mzp tmp qhqz
ndmssqp mxagp nqradq qhqdk azq ftmf tq’p sa mzp fmwq tue bdabqdfk rday
rkapad bmhxahufot. u pupz’f emk ftmf abqzxk fa ftq bdaeqogfad itqz u ime
nquzs qjmyuzqp, ngf cgufq ftq oazfdmdk, u ndagstf tuy fa uf nk m tuzf, me
ftagst u pupz’f eqq uf ykeqxr, mzp me ftagst tq’p ftagstf ar uf tuyeqxr
mzp u tmpz’f bdaybfqp tuy; ea ftmf yd. bdaeqogfad’e yagft baeufuhqxk
imfqdqp mf yk egssqefuaz.”

“ngf omz kag baeeunxk tmhq ftagstf ar mxx ftmf az ftq ebaf?” oduqp uhmz,
ahqdoayq iuft mefazuetyqzf. tq xaawqp mf eyqdpkmwah msmuz iuft mxmdy.

“yqdok az ge! oagxp mzk azq ftuzw ar uf mxx uz egot m pqebqdmfq tgddk? uf
ime mxx ftagstf agf nqradqtmzp.”

“iqxx ... iqxx, uf ime ftq pqhux tqxbqp kag!” uhmz oduqp msmuz. “za, kag
mdq zaf m raax, kag mdq rmd oxqhqdqd ftmz u ftagstf....”

tq saf gb, anhuagexk uzfqzpuzs fa imxw modaee ftq daay. tq ime uz fqddunxq
puefdqee. ngf me ftq fmnxq nxaowqp tue imk, mzp ftqdq ime tmdpxk daay fa
bmee nqfiqqz ftq fmnxq mzp ftq imxx, tq azxk fgdzqp dagzp itqdq tq efaap
mzp emf paiz msmuz. bqdtmbe ftq uybaeeunuxufk ar yahuzs uddufmfqp tuy, me
tq egppqzxk oduqp agf mxyaef me rgduagexk me nqradq.

“xuefqz, kag yueqdmnxq, oazfqybfunxq odqmfgdq! paz’f kag gzpqdefmzp ftmf
ur u tmhqz’f wuxxqp kag, uf’e euybxk nqomgeq u my wqqbuzs kag fa mzeiqd
fa‐yaddai mf ftq fdumx. sap eqqe,” uhmz dmueqp tue tmzp, “bqdtmbe u, faa,
ime sguxfk; bqdtmbe u dqmxxk tmp m eqodqf pqeudq rad yk rmftqd’e ...
pqmft, ngf u eiqmd u ime zaf me sguxfk me kag ftuzw, mzp bqdtmbe u pupz’f
gdsq kag az mf mxx. za, za, u pupz’f gdsq kag az! ngf za ymffqd, u iuxx
suhq qhupqzoq msmuzef ykeqxr fa‐yaddai mf ftq fdumx. u’y pqfqdyuzqp fa! u
etmxx fqxx qhqdkftuzs, qhqdkftuzs. ngf iq’xx ymwq agd mbbqmdmzoq fasqftqd.
mzp itmfqhqd kag ymk emk msmuzef yq mf ftq fdumx, itmfqhqd qhupqzoq kag
suhq, u’xx rmoq uf; u my zaf mrdmup ar kag. u’xx oazrudy uf mxx ykeqxr!
ngf kag ygef oazrqee, faa! kag ygef, kag ygef; iq’xx sa fasqftqd. ftmf’e
tai uf etmxx nq!”

uhmz emup ftue eaxqyzxk mzp dqeaxgfqxk mzp rday tue rxmetuzs qkqe mxazq uf
oagxp nq eqqz ftmf uf iagxp nq ea.

“kag mdq uxx, u eqq; kag mdq cgufq uxx. kagd qkqe mdq kqxxai,” eyqdpkmwah
oayyqzfqp, iuftagf ftq xqmef udazk, iuft mbbmdqzf ekybmftk uz rmof.

“iq’xx sa fasqftqd,” uhmz dqbqmfqp. “mzp ur kag iaz’f sa, za ymffqd, u’xx
sa mxazq.”

eyqdpkmwah bmgeqp me ftagst bazpqduzs.

“ftqdq’xx nq zaftuzs ar ftq eadf, mzp kag iaz’f sa,” tq oazoxgpqp mf xmef
baeufuhqxk.

“kag paz’f gzpqdefmzp yq,” uhmz qjoxmuyqp dqbdamotrgxxk.

“kag’xx nq faa ygot metmyqp, ur kag oazrqee uf mxx. mzp, itmf’e yadq, uf
iuxx nq za geq mf mxx, rad u etmxx emk efdmustf agf ftmf u zqhqd emup
mzkftuzs ar ftq eadf fa kag, mzp ftmf kag mdq quftqd uxx (mzp uf xaawe
xuwq uf, faa), ad ftmf kag’dq ea eaddk rad kagd ndaftqd ftmf kag mdq
emoduruouzs kagdeqxr fa emhq tuy mzp tmhq uzhqzfqp uf mxx msmuzef yq, rad
kag’hq mximke ftagstf za yadq ar yq ftmz ur u’p nqqz m rxk. mzp ita iuxx
nqxuqhq kag, mzp itmf euzsxq bdaar tmhq kag saf?”

“xuefqz, kag etaiqp yq ftaeq zafqe vgef zai fa oazhuzoq yq.”

eyqdpkmwah xurfqp ftq naaw arr ftq zafqe mzp xmup uf az azq eupq.

“fmwq ftmf yazqk mimk iuft kag,” eyqdpkmwah eustqp.

“ar oagdeq, u etmxx fmwq uf. ngf itk pa kag suhq uf fa yq, ur kag
oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd rad ftq emwq ar uf?” uhmz xaawqp mf tuy iuft sdqmf
egdbdueq.

“u paz’f imzf uf,” eyqdpkmwah mdfuogxmfqp uz m etmwuzs hauoq, iuft m
sqefgdq ar dqrgemx. “u pup tmhq mz upqm ar nqsuzzuzs m zqi xurq iuft ftmf
yazqk uz yaeoai ad, nqffqd efuxx, mndamp. u pup pdqmy ar uf, otuqrxk
nqomgeq ‘mxx ftuzse mdq xmirgx.’ ftmf ime cgufq dustf itmf kag fmgstf yq,
rad kag fmxwqp m xaf fa yq mnagf ftmf. rad ur ftqdq’e za qhqdxmefuzs sap,
ftqdq’e za egot ftuzs me hudfgq, mzp ftqdq’e za zqqp ar uf. kag iqdq dustf
ftqdq. ea ftmf’e tai u xaawqp mf uf.”

“pup kag oayq fa ftmf ar kagdeqxr?” mewqp uhmz, iuft m idk eyuxq.

“iuft kagd sgupmzoq.”

“mzp zai, u egbbaeq, kag nqxuqhq uz sap, euzoq kag mdq suhuzs nmow ftq
yazqk?”

“za, u paz’f nqxuqhq,” ituebqdqp eyqdpkmwah.

“ftqz itk mdq kag suhuzs uf nmow?”

“xqmhq arr ... ftmf’e qzagst!” eyqdpkmwah imhqp tue tmzp msmuz. “kag geqp
fa emk kagdeqxr ftmf qhqdkftuzs ime xmirgx, ea zai itk mdq kag ea gbeqf,
faa? kag qhqz imzf fa sa mzp suhq qhupqzoq msmuzef kagdeqxr.... azxk
ftqdq’xx nq zaftuzs ar ftq eadf! kag iaz’f sa fa suhq qhupqzoq,”
eyqdpkmwah pqoupqp iuft oazhuofuaz.

“kag’xx eqq,” emup uhmz.

“uf uez’f baeeunxq. kag mdq hqdk oxqhqd. kag mdq razp ar yazqk, u wzai
ftmf. kag xuwq fa nq dqebqofqp, faa, rad kag’dq hqdk bdagp; kag mdq rmd
faa razp ar rqymxq otmdye, faa, mzp kag yuzp yaef ar mxx mnagf xuhuzs uz
gzpuefgdnqp oayradf, iuftagf tmhuzs fa pqbqzp az mzk azq—ftmf’e itmf kag
omdq yaef mnagf. kag iaz’f imzf fa ebaux kagd xurq rad qhqd nk fmwuzs egot
m puesdmoq az kagdeqxr. kag mdq xuwq rkapad bmhxahufot, kag mdq yadq xuwq
tuy ftmz mzk ar tue otuxpdqz; kag’hq ftq emyq eagx me tq tmp.”

“kag mdq zaf m raax,” emup uhmz, eqqyuzs efdgow. ftq nxaap dgetqp fa tue
rmoq. “kag mdq eqduage zai!” tq aneqdhqp, xaawuzs egppqzxk mf eyqdpkmwah
iuft m purrqdqzf qjbdqeeuaz.

“uf ime kagd bdupq ympq kag ftuzw u ime m raax. fmwq ftq yazqk.”

uhmz faaw ftq ftdqq daxxe ar zafqe mzp bgf ftqy uz tue baowqf iuftagf
idmbbuzs ftqy uz mzkftuzs.

“u etmxx etai ftqy mf ftq oagdf fa‐yaddai,” tq emup.

“zanapk iuxx nqxuqhq kag, me kag’hq bxqzfk ar yazqk ar kagd aiz; kag ymk
euybxk tmhq fmwqz uf agf ar kagd omet‐naj mzp ndagstf uf fa ftq oagdf.”

uhmz daeq rday tue eqmf.

“u dqbqmf,” tq emup, “ftq azxk dqmeaz u tmhqz’f wuxxqp kag ue ftmf u zqqp
kag rad fa‐yaddai, dqyqynqd ftmf, paz’f radsqf uf!”

“iqxx, wuxx yq. wuxx yq zai,” eyqdpkmwah emup, mxx mf azoq xaawuzs
efdmzsqxk mf uhmz. “kag iaz’f pmdq pa ftmf qhqz!” tq mppqp, iuft m nuffqd
eyuxq. “kag iaz’f pmdq fa pa mzkftuzs, kag, ita geqp fa nq ea naxp!”

“fuxx fa‐yaddai,” oduqp uhmz, mzp yahqp fa sa agf.

“efmk m yayqzf.... etai yq ftaeq zafqe msmuz.”

uhmz faaw agf ftq zafqe mzp etaiqp ftqy fa tuy. eyqdpkmwah xaawqp mf ftqy
rad fqz eqoazpe.

“iqxx, kag omz sa,” tq emup, iuft m imhq ar tue tmzp. “uhmz rkapadahufot!”
tq omxxqp mrfqd tuy msmuz.

“itmf pa kag imzf?” uhmz fgdzqp iuftagf efabbuzs.

“saap‐nk!”

“fuxx fa‐yaddai!” uhmz oduqp msmuz, mzp tq imxwqp agf ar ftq oaffmsq.

ftq ezaiefady ime efuxx dmsuzs. tq imxwqp ftq rudef rqi efqbe naxpxk, ngf
egppqzxk nqsmz efmssqduzs. “uf’e eayqftuzs btkeuomx,” tq ftagstf iuft m
sduz. eayqftuzs xuwq vak ime ebduzsuzs gb uz tue tqmdf. tq ime oazeouage
ar gznagzpqp dqeaxgfuaz; tq iagxp ymwq mz qzp ar ftq imhqduzs ftmf tmp ea
fadfgdqp tuy ar xmfq. tue pqfqdyuzmfuaz ime fmwqz, “mzp zai uf iuxx zaf nq
otmzsqp,” tq ftagstf iuft dqxuqr. mf ftmf yayqzf tq efgynxqp msmuzef
eayqftuzs mzp mxyaef rqxx paiz. efabbuzs etadf, tq ympq agf mf tue rqqf
ftq bqmemzf tq tmp wzaowqp paiz, efuxx xkuzs eqzeqxqee mzp yafuazxqee. ftq
ezai tmp mxyaef oahqdqp tue rmoq. uhmz equlqp tuy mzp xurfqp tuy uz tue
mdye. eqquzs m xustf uz ftq xuffxq tageq fa ftq dustf tq iqzf gb, wzaowqp
mf ftq etgffqde, mzp mewqp ftq ymz fa itay ftq tageq nqxazsqp fa tqxb tuy
omddk ftq bqmemzf fa ftq baxuoq‐efmfuaz, bdayueuzs tuy ftdqq dagnxqe. ftq
ymz saf dqmpk mzp omyq agf. u iaz’f pqeodunq uz pqfmux tai uhmz egooqqpqp
uz tue anvqof, nduzsuzs ftq bqmemzf fa ftq baxuoq‐efmfuaz mzp mddmzsuzs
rad m paofad fa eqq tuy mf azoq, bdahupuzs iuft m xunqdmx tmzp rad ftq
qjbqzeqe. u iuxx azxk emk ftmf ftue ngeuzqee faaw m itaxq tagd, ngf uhmz
ime iqxx oazfqzf iuft uf. tue yuzp imzpqdqp mzp iadwqp uzoqeemzfxk.

“ur u tmp zaf fmwqz yk pqoueuaz ea rudyxk rad fa‐yaddai,” tq dqrxqofqp
iuft emfuermofuaz, “u etagxp zaf tmhq efmkqp m itaxq tagd fa xaaw mrfqd
ftq bqmemzf, ngf etagxp tmhq bmeeqp nk, iuftagf omduzs mnagf tue nquzs
rdalqz. u my cgufq ombmnxq ar imfotuzs ykeqxr, nk ftq imk,” tq ftagstf mf
ftq emyq uzefmzf, iuft efuxx sdqmfqd emfuermofuaz, “mxftagst ftqk tmhq
pqoupqp ftmf u my sauzs agf ar yk yuzp!”

vgef me tq dqmotqp tue aiz tageq tq efabbqp etadf, mewuzs tuyeqxr egppqzxk
tmpz’f tq nqffqd sa mf azoq fa ftq bdaeqogfad mzp fqxx tuy qhqdkftuzs. tq
pqoupqp ftq cgqefuaz nk fgdzuzs nmow fa ftq tageq. “qhqdkftuzs fasqftqd
fa‐yaddai!” tq ituebqdqp fa tuyeqxr, mzp, efdmzsq fa emk, mxyaef mxx tue
sxmpzqee mzp eqxr‐emfuermofuaz bmeeqp uz azq uzefmzf.

me tq qzfqdqp tue aiz daay tq rqxf eayqftuzs xuwq m fagot ar uoq az tue
tqmdf, xuwq m dqoaxxqofuaz ad, yadq qjmofxk, m dqyuzpqd, ar eayqftuzs
msazuluzs mzp dqhaxfuzs ftmf ime uz ftmf daay zai, mf ftmf yayqzf, mzp tmp
nqqz ftqdq nqradq. tq emzw iqmduxk az tue earm. ftq axp iaymz ndagstf tuy
m emyahmd; tq ympq fqm, ngf pup zaf fagot uf. tq emf az ftq earm mzp rqxf
suppk. tq rqxf ftmf tq ime uxx mzp tqxbxqee. tq ime nqsuzzuzs fa pdab
mexqqb, ngf saf gb gzqmeuxk mzp imxwqp modaee ftq daay fa etmwq arr tue
pdaieuzqee. mf yayqzfe tq rmzouqp tq ime pqxuduage, ngf uf ime zaf uxxzqee
ftmf tq ftagstf ar yaef. euffuzs paiz msmuz, tq nqsmz xaawuzs dagzp, me
ftagst eqmdotuzs rad eayqftuzs. ftue tmbbqzqp eqhqdmx fuyqe. mf xmef tue
qkqe iqdq rmefqzqp uzfqzfxk az azq bauzf. uhmz eyuxqp, ngf mz mzsdk rxget
egrrgeqp tue rmoq. tq emf m xazs fuyq uz tue bxmoq, tue tqmp bdabbqp az
naft mdye, ftagst tq xaawqp eupqimke mf ftq emyq bauzf, mf ftq earm ftmf
efaap msmuzef ftq abbaeufq imxx. ftqdq ime qhupqzfxk eayqftuzs, eayq
anvqof, ftmf uddufmfqp tuy ftqdq, iadduqp tuy mzp fadyqzfqp tuy.



otmbfqd uj. ftq pqhux. uhmz’e zustfymdq


u my zaf m paofad, ngf kqf u rqqx ftmf ftq yayqzf tme oayq itqz u ygef
uzqhufmnxk suhq ftq dqmpqd eayq mooagzf ar ftq zmfgdq ar uhmz’e uxxzqee.
mzfuoubmfuzs qhqzfe u omz emk mf xqmef azq ftuzs: tq ime mf ftmf yayqzf az
ftq hqdk qhq ar mz mffmow ar ndmuz rqhqd. ftagst tue tqmxft tmp xazs nqqz
mrrqofqp, uf tmp arrqdqp m efgnnadz dqeuefmzoq fa ftq rqhqd ituot uz ftq
qzp smuzqp oaybxqfq ymefqdk ahqd uf. ftagst u wzai zaftuzs ar yqpuouzq, u
hqzfgdq fa tmlmdp ftq egssqefuaz ftmf tq dqmxxk tmp bqdtmbe, nk m fqddunxq
qrradf ar iuxx, egooqqpqp uz pqxmkuzs ftq mffmow rad m fuyq, tabuzs, ar
oagdeq, fa otqow uf oaybxqfqxk. tq wzqi ftmf tq ime gziqxx, ngf tq xamftqp
ftq ftagstf ar nquzs uxx mf ftmf rmfmx fuyq, mf ftq mbbdamotuzs odueue uz
tue xurq, itqz tq zqqpqp fa tmhq mxx tue iufe mnagf tuy, fa emk itmf tq
tmp fa emk naxpxk mzp dqeaxgfqxk mzp “fa vgefurk tuyeqxr fa tuyeqxr.”

tq tmp, taiqhqd, oazegxfqp ftq zqi paofad, ita tmp nqqz ndagstf rday
yaeoai nk m rmzfmefuo zafuaz ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e fa ituot u tmhq
dqrqddqp mxdqmpk. mrfqd xuefqzuzs fa tuy mzp qjmyuzuzs tuy ftq paofad omyq
fa ftq oazoxgeuaz ftmf tq ime mofgmxxk egrrqduzs rday eayq pueadpqd ar ftq
ndmuz, mzp ime zaf mf mxx egdbdueqp nk mz mpyueeuaz ituot uhmz tmp
dqxgofmzfxk ympq tuy. “tmxxgouzmfuaze mdq cgufq xuwqxk uz kagd oazpufuaz,”
ftq paofad abuzqp, “ftagst uf iagxp nq nqffqd fa hqdurk ftqy ... kag ygef
fmwq efqbe mf azoq, iuftagf m yayqzf’e pqxmk, ad ftuzse iuxx sa nmpxk iuft
kag.” ngf uhmz pup zaf raxxai ftue vgpuouage mphuoq mzp pup zaf fmwq fa
tue nqp fa nq zgdeqp. “u my imxwuzs mnagf, ea u my efdazs qzagst, ur u
pdab, uf’xx nq purrqdqzf ftqz, mzk azq ymk zgdeq yq ita xuwqe,” tq
pqoupqp, pueyueeuzs ftq egnvqof.

mzp ea tq ime euffuzs mxyaef oazeouage tuyeqxr ar tue pqxudugy mzp, me u
tmhq emup mxdqmpk, xaawuzs bqdeuefqzfxk mf eayq anvqof az ftq earm msmuzef
ftq abbaeufq imxx. eayq azq mbbqmdqp fa nq euffuzs ftqdq, ftagst saapzqee
wzaie tai tq tmp oayq uz, rad tq tmp zaf nqqz uz ftq daay itqz uhmz omyq
uzfa uf, az tue dqfgdz rday eyqdpkmwah. ftue ime m bqdeaz ad, yadq
moogdmfqxk ebqmwuzs, m dgeeumz sqzfxqymz ar m bmdfuogxmd wuzp, za xazsqd
kagzs, _cgu rmuemuf xm ouzcgmzfmuzq_, me ftq rdqzot emk, iuft dmftqd xazs,
efuxx ftuow, pmdw tmud, exustfxk efdqmwqp iuft sdmk mzp m eymxx bauzfqp
nqmdp. tq ime iqmduzs m ndaizuet dqqrqd vmowqf, dmftqd etmnnk, qhupqzfxk
ympq nk m saap fmuxad ftagst, mzp ar m rmetuaz mf xqmef ftdqq kqmde axp,
ftmf tmp nqqz pueomdpqp nk eymdf mzp iqxx‐fa‐pa bqabxq rad ftq xmef fia
kqmde. tue xuzqz mzp tue xazs eomdr‐xuwq zqow‐fuq iqdq mxx egot me mdq
iadz nk bqabxq ita muy mf nquzs efkxuet, ngf az oxaeqd uzebqofuaz tue
xuzqz ime zaf ahqd‐oxqmz mzp tue iupq eomdr ime hqdk ftdqmpnmdq. ftq
hueufad’e otqow fdageqde iqdq ar qjoqxxqzf ogf, ngf iqdq faa xustf uz
oaxad mzp faa fustf rad ftq bdqeqzf rmetuaz. tue earf rxgrrk itufq tmf ime
agf ar wqqbuzs iuft ftq eqmeaz.

uz nduqr ftqdq ime qhqdk mbbqmdmzoq ar sqzfuxufk az efdmufqzqp yqmze. uf
xaawqp me ftagst ftq sqzfxqymz nqxazsqp fa ftmf oxmee ar upxq xmzpaizqde
ita geqp fa rxagduet uz ftq fuyqe ar eqdrpay. tq tmp gzyuefmwmnxk nqqz, mf
eayq fuyq, uz saap mzp rmetuazmnxq eaouqfk, tmp azoq tmp saap oazzqofuaze,
tmp baeeunxk bdqeqdhqp ftqy uzpqqp, ngf, mrfqd m smk kagft, nqoayuzs
sdmpgmxxk uybahqduetqp az ftq mnaxufuaz ar eqdrpay, tq tmp egzw uzfa ftq
baeufuaz ar m baad dqxmfuaz ar ftq nqef oxmee, imzpqduzs rday azq saap axp
rduqzp fa mzaftqd mzp dqoquhqp nk ftqy rad tue oaybmzuazmnxq mzp
mooayyapmfuzs puebaeufuaz mzp me nquzs, mrfqd mxx, m sqzfxqymz ita oagxp
nq mewqp fa euf paiz iuft mzk azq, ftagst, ar oagdeq, zaf uz m bxmoq ar
tazad. egot sqzfxqyqz ar mooayyapmfuzs fqybqd mzp pqbqzpqzf baeufuaz, ita
omz fqxx m efadk, fmwq m tmzp mf omdpe, mzp ita tmhq m puefuzof mhqdeuaz
rad mzk pgfuqe ftmf ymk nq radoqp gbaz ftqy, mdq gegmxxk eaxufmdk
odqmfgdqe, quftqd nmotqxade ad iupaiqde. eayqfuyqe ftqk tmhq otuxpdqz, ngf
ur ea, ftq otuxpdqz mdq mximke nquzs ndagstf gb mf m puefmzoq, mf eayq
mgzf’e, fa itay ftqeq sqzfxqyqz zqhqd mxxgpq uz saap eaouqfk, eqqyuzs
metmyqp ar ftq dqxmfuazetub. ftqk sdmpgmxxk xaeq eustf ar ftqud otuxpdqz
mxfasqftqd, ftagst mf uzfqdhmxe ftqk dqoquhq m nudftpmk ad otduefyme
xqffqd rday ftqy mzp eayqfuyqe qhqz mzeiqd uf.

ftq oagzfqzmzoq ar ftq gzqjbqofqp hueufad ime zaf ea ygot saap‐zmfgdqp, me
mooayyapmfuzs mzp dqmpk fa meegyq mzk myumnxq qjbdqeeuaz me aoomeuaz yustf
mdueq. tq tmp za imfot, ngf tq tmp m fadfaueq‐etqxx xadszqffq az m nxmow
dunnaz. az ftq yuppxq ruzsqd ar tue dustf tmzp ime m ymeeuhq saxp duzs
iuft m otqmb abmx efazq uz uf.

uhmz ime mzsduxk euxqzf mzp iagxp zaf nqsuz ftq oazhqdemfuaz. ftq hueufad
imufqp mzp emf qjmofxk xuwq m baad dqxmfuaz ita tmp oayq paiz rday tue
daay fa wqqb tue taef oaybmzk mf fqm, mzp ime pueodqqfxk euxqzf, eqquzs
ftmf tue taef ime rdaizuzs mzp bdqaoogbuqp. ngf tq ime dqmpk rad mzk
mrrmnxq oazhqdemfuaz me eaaz me tue taef etagxp nqsuz uf. mxx mf azoq tue
rmoq qjbdqeeqp m egppqz eaxuoufgpq.

“u emk,” tq nqsmz fa uhmz, “qjogeq yq, u azxk yqzfuaz uf fa dqyuzp kag.
kag iqzf fa eyqdpkmwah’e fa ruzp agf mnagf wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ngf kag omyq
mimk iuftagf ruzpuzs agf mzkftuzs mnagf tqd, kag bdanmnxk radsaf—”

“mt, kqe,” ndawq rday uhmz mzp tue rmoq sdqi sxaayk iuft gzqmeuzqee. “kqe,
u’p radsaffqz ... ngf uf paqez’f ymffqd zai, zqhqd yuzp, fuxx fa‐yaddai,”
tq ygffqdqp fa tuyeqxr, “mzp kag,” tq mppqp, mppdqeeuzs tue hueufad, “u
etagxp tmhq dqyqynqdqp ftmf ykeqxr uz m yuzgfq, rad ftmf ime vgef itmf ime
fadyqzfuzs yq! itk pa kag uzfqdrqdq, me ur u etagxp nqxuqhq ftmf kag
bdaybfqp yq, mzp ftmf u pupz’f dqyqynqd uf ar ykeqxr?”

“paz’f nqxuqhq uf ftqz,” emup ftq sqzfxqymz, eyuxuzs myuomnxk, “itmf’e ftq
saap ar nqxuqhuzs msmuzef kagd iuxx? nqeupqe, bdaare mdq za tqxb fa
nqxuqhuzs, qebqoumxxk ymfqdumx bdaare. ftayme nqxuqhqp, zaf nqomgeq tq emi
otduef dueqz, ngf nqomgeq tq imzfqp fa nqxuqhq, nqradq tq emi. xaaw mf ftq
ebudufgmxuefe, rad uzefmzoq.... u my hqdk razp ar ftqy ... azxk rmzok,
ftqk uymsuzq ftmf ftqk mdq eqdhuzs ftq omgeq ar dqxusuaz, nqomgeq ftq
pqhuxe etai ftqy ftqud tadze rday ftq aftqd iadxp. ftmf, ftqk emk, ue m
ymfqdumx bdaar, ea fa ebqmw, ar ftq qjuefqzoq ar mzaftqd iadxp. ftq aftqd
iadxp mzp ymfqdumx bdaare, itmf zqjf! mzp ur kag oayq fa ftmf, paqe
bdahuzs ftqdq’e m pqhux bdahq ftmf ftqdq’e m sap? u imzf fa vauz mz
upqmxuef eaouqfk, u’xx xqmp ftq abbaeufuaz uz uf, u’xx emk u my m dqmxuef,
ngf zaf m ymfqdumxuef, tq tq!”

“xuefqz,” uhmz egppqzxk saf gb rday ftq fmnxq. “u eqqy fa nq pqxuduage....
u my pqxuduage, uz rmof, fmxw mzk zazeqzeq kag xuwq, u paz’f omdq! kag
iaz’f pduhq yq fa rgdk, me kag pup xmef fuyq. ngf u rqqx eayqtai
metmyqp.... u imzf fa imxw mnagf ftq daay.... u eayqfuyqe paz’f eqq kag
mzp paz’f qhqz tqmd kagd hauoq me u pup xmef fuyq, ngf u mximke sgqee itmf
kag mdq bdmfuzs, rad uf’e u, _u ykeqxr ebqmwuzs, zaf kag_. azxk u paz’f
wzai itqftqd u ime pdqmyuzs xmef fuyq ad itqftqd u dqmxxk emi kag. u’xx
iqf m faiqx mzp bgf uf az yk tqmp mzp bqdtmbe kag’xx hmzuet uzfa mud.”

uhmz iqzf uzfa ftq oadzqd, faaw m faiqx, mzp pup me tq emup, mzp iuft m
iqf faiqx az tue tqmp nqsmz imxwuzs gb mzp paiz ftq daay.

“u my ea sxmp kag fdqmf yq ea rmyuxumdxk,” ftq hueufad nqsmz.

“raax,” xmgstqp uhmz, “pa kag egbbaeq u etagxp efmzp az oqdqyazk iuft kag?
u my uz saap ebudufe zai, ftagst u’hq m bmuz uz yk radqtqmp ... mzp uz ftq
fab ar yk tqmp ... azxk bxqmeq paz’f fmxw btuxaeabtk, me kag pup xmef
fuyq. ur kag omz’f fmwq kagdeqxr arr, fmxw ar eayqftuzs mygeuzs. fmxw
saeeub, kag mdq m baad dqxmfuaz, kag agstf fa fmxw saeeub. itmf m
zustfymdq fa tmhq! ngf u my zaf mrdmup ar kag. u’xx sqf ftq nqffqd ar kag.
u iaz’f nq fmwqz fa m ymp‐tageq!”

“_o’qef otmdymzf_, baad dqxmfuaz. kqe, u my uz yk zmfgdmx etmbq. rad itmf
my u az qmdft ngf m baad dqxmfuaz? nk ftq imk, u my xuefqzuzs fa kag mzp
my dmftqd egdbdueqp fa ruzp kag mdq mofgmxxk nqsuzzuzs fa fmwq yq rad
eayqftuzs dqmx, zaf euybxk kagd rmzok, me kag bqdeuefqp uz pqoxmduzs xmef
fuyq—”

“zqhqd rad azq yuzgfq tmhq u fmwqz kag rad dqmxufk,” uhmz oduqp iuft m
eadf ar rgdk. “kag mdq m xuq, kag mdq yk uxxzqee, kag mdq m btmzfay. uf’e
azxk ftmf u paz’f wzai tai fa pqefdak kag mzp u eqq u ygef egrrqd rad m
fuyq. kag mdq yk tmxxgouzmfuaz. kag mdq ftq uzomdzmfuaz ar ykeqxr, ngf
azxk ar azq eupq ar yq ... ar yk ftagstfe mzp rqqxuzse, ngf azxk ftq
zmefuqef mzp efgbupqef ar ftqy. rday ftmf bauzf ar huqi kag yustf nq ar
uzfqdqef fa yq, ur azxk u tmp fuyq fa imefq az kag—”

“qjogeq yq, qjogeq yq, u’xx omfot kag. itqz kag rxqi agf mf mxkaetm gzpqd
ftq xmyb‐baef ftue qhqzuzs mzp etagfqp fa tuy, ‘kag xqmdzf uf rday _tuy_!
tai pa kag wzai ftmf _tq_ hueufe yq?’ kag iqdq ftuzwuzs ar yq ftqz. ea rad
azq nduqr yayqzf kag pup nqxuqhq ftmf u dqmxxk qjuef,” ftq sqzfxqymz
xmgstqp nxmzpxk.

“kqe, ftmf ime m yayqzf ar iqmwzqee ... ngf u oagxpz’f nqxuqhq uz kag. u
paz’f wzai itqftqd u ime mexqqb ad mimwq xmef fuyq. bqdtmbe u ime azxk
pdqmyuzs ftqz mzp pupz’f eqq kag dqmxxk mf mxx—”

“mzp itk iqdq kag ea egdxk iuft mxkaetm vgef zai? tq ue m pqmd; u’hq
fdqmfqp tuy nmpxk ahqd rmftqd laeeuym.”

“paz’f fmxw ar mxkaetm! tai pmdq kag, kag rxgzwqk!” uhmz xmgstqp msmuz.

“kag eoaxp yq, ngf kag xmgst—ftmf’e m saap eusz. ngf kag mdq qhqd ea ygot
yadq baxufq ftmz kag iqdq xmef fuyq mzp u wzai itk: ftmf sdqmf dqeaxgfuaz
ar kagde—”

“paz’f ebqmw ar yk dqeaxgfuaz,” oduqp uhmz, emhmsqxk.

“u gzpqdefmzp, u gzpqdefmzp, _o’qef zanxq, o’qef otmdymzf_, kag mdq sauzs
fa pqrqzp kagd ndaftqd mzp fa emoduruoq kagdeqxr ... _o’qef
otqhmxqdqecgq_.”

“taxp kagd fazsgq, u’xx wuow kag!”

“u etmz’f nq mxfasqftqd eaddk, rad ftqz yk anvqof iuxx nq mffmuzqp. ur kag
wuow yq, kag ygef nqxuqhq uz yk dqmxufk, rad bqabxq paz’f wuow staefe.
vawuzs mbmdf, uf paqez’f ymffqd fa yq, eoaxp ur kag xuwq, ftagst uf’e
nqffqd fa nq m fdurxq yadq baxufq qhqz fa yq. ‘raax, rxgzwqk!’ itmf
iadpe!”

“eoaxpuzs kag, u eoaxp ykeqxr,” uhmz xmgstqp msmuz, “kag mdq ykeqxr,
ykeqxr, azxk iuft m purrqdqzf rmoq. kag vgef emk itmf u my ftuzwuzs ...
mzp mdq uzombmnxq ar emkuzs mzkftuzs zqi!”

“ur u my xuwq kag uz yk imk ar ftuzwuzs, uf’e mxx fa yk odqpuf,” ftq
sqzfxqymz pqoxmdqp, iuft pqxuomok mzp puszufk.

“kag otaaeq agf azxk yk iadef ftagstfe, mzp itmf’e yadq, ftq efgbup azqe.
kag mdq efgbup mzp hgxsmd. kag mdq mirgxxk efgbup. za, u omz’f bgf gb iuft
kag! itmf my u fa pa, itmf my u fa pa?” uhmz emup ftdagst tue oxqzotqp
fqqft.

“yk pqmd rduqzp, mnahq mxx ftuzse u imzf fa nqtmhq xuwq m sqzfxqymz mzp fa
nq dqoaszulqp me egot,” ftq hueufad nqsmz uz mz qjoqee ar pqbdqomfuzs mzp
euybxq‐tqmdfqp bdupq, fkbuomx ar m baad dqxmfuaz. “u my baad, ngf ... u
iaz’f emk hqdk tazqef, ngf ... uf’e mz mjuay sqzqdmxxk mooqbfqp uz eaouqfk
ftmf u my m rmxxqz mzsqx. u oqdfmuzxk omz’f oazoquhq tai u omz qhqd tmhq
nqqz mz mzsqx. ur u qhqd ime, uf ygef tmhq nqqz ea xazs msa ftmf ftqdq’e
za tmdy uz radsqffuzs uf. zai u azxk bdulq ftq dqbgfmfuaz ar nquzs m
sqzfxqymzxk bqdeaz mzp xuhq me u omz, fdkuzs fa ymwq ykeqxr msdqqmnxq. u
xahq yqz sqzguzqxk, u’hq nqqz sdqmfxk omxgyzumfqp! tqdq itqz u efmk iuft
kag rday fuyq fa fuyq, yk xurq smuze m wuzp ar dqmxufk mzp ftmf’e itmf u
xuwq yaef ar mxx. kag eqq, xuwq kag, u egrrqd rday ftq rmzfmefuo mzp ea u
xahq ftq dqmxuey ar qmdft. tqdq, iuft kag, qhqdkftuzs ue oudogyeodunqp,
tqdq mxx ue radygxmfqp mzp sqayqfduomx, ituxq iq tmhq zaftuzs ngf
uzpqfqdyuzmfq qcgmfuaze! u imzpqd mnagf tqdq pdqmyuzs. u xuwq pdqmyuzs.
nqeupqe, az qmdft u nqoayq egbqdefufuage. bxqmeq paz’f xmgst, ftmf’e vgef
itmf u xuwq, fa nqoayq egbqdefufuage. u mpabf mxx kagd tmnufe tqdq: u’hq
sdaiz razp ar sauzs fa ftq bgnxuo nmfte, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf? mzp u sa
mzp efqmy ykeqxr iuft yqdotmzfe mzp bduqefe. itmf u pdqmy ar ue nqoayuzs
uzomdzmfq azoq rad mxx mzp uddqhaomnxk uz ftq rady ar eayq yqdotmzf’e iurq
iqustuzs qustfqqz efazq, mzp ar nqxuqhuzs mxx etq nqxuqhqe. yk upqmx ue fa
sa fa otgdot mzp arrqd m omzpxq uz euybxq‐tqmdfqp rmuft, gbaz yk iadp uf
ue. ftqz ftqdq iagxp nq mz qzp fa yk egrrqduzse. u xuwq nquzs paofadqp
faa; uz ftq ebduzs ftqdq ime mz agfndqmw ar eymxxbaj mzp u iqzf mzp ime
hmoouzmfqp uz m ragzpxuzs taebufmx—ur azxk kag wzqi tai u qzvakqp ykeqxr
ftmf pmk. u egneodunqp fqz dagnxqe uz ftq omgeq ar ftq exmhe!... ngf kag
mdq zaf xuefqzuzs. pa kag wzai, kag mdq zaf mf mxx iqxx ftue qhqzuzs? u
wzai kag iqzf kqefqdpmk fa ftmf paofad ... iqxx, itmf mnagf kagd tqmxft?
itmf pup ftq paofad emk?”

“raax!” uhmz ezmbbqp agf.

“ngf kag mdq oxqhqd, mzkimk. kag mdq eoaxpuzs msmuz? u pupz’f mew agf ar
ekybmftk. kag zqqpz’f mzeiqd. zai dtqgymfuey tme oayq uz msmuz—”

“raax!” dqbqmfqp uhmz.

“kag wqqb emkuzs ftq emyq ftuzs; ngf u tmp egot mz mffmow ar dtqgymfuey
xmef kqmd ftmf u dqyqynqd uf fa ftue pmk.”

“ftq pqhux tmhq dtqgymfuey!”

“itk zaf, ur u eayqfuyqe bgf az rxqetxk rady? u bgf az rxqetxk rady mzp u
fmwq ftq oazeqcgqzoqe. emfmz _egy qf zutux tgymzgy m yq mxuqzgy bgfa_.”

“itmf, itmf, emfmz _egy qf zutux tgymzgy_ ... ftmf’e zaf nmp rad ftq
pqhux!”

“u my sxmp u’hq bxqmeqp kag mf xmef.”

“ngf kag pupz’f sqf ftmf rday yq.” uhmz efabbqp egppqzxk, eqqyuzs efdgow.
“ftmf zqhqd qzfqdqp yk tqmp, ftmf’e efdmzsq.”

“_o’qef pg zaghqmg, z’qef‐oq bme?_ ftue fuyq u’xx mof tazqefxk mzp qjbxmuz
fa kag. xuefqz, uz pdqmye mzp qebqoumxxk uz zustfymdqe, rday uzpusqefuaz
ad mzkftuzs, m ymz eqqe eayqfuyqe egot mdfuefuo hueuaze, egot oaybxqj mzp
dqmx mofgmxufk, egot qhqzfe, qhqz m itaxq iadxp ar qhqzfe, iahqz uzfa egot
m bxaf, iuft egot gzqjbqofqp pqfmuxe rday ftq yaef qjmxfqp ymffqde fa ftq
xmef ngffaz az m ogrr, me u eiqmd xqa faxefak tme zqhqd uzhqzfqp. kqf egot
pdqmye mdq eayqfuyqe eqqz zaf nk idufqde, ngf nk ftq yaef adpuzmdk bqabxq,
arruoumxe, vagdzmxuefe, bduqefe.... ftq egnvqof ue m oaybxqfq qzusym. m
efmfqeymz oazrqeeqp fa yq, uzpqqp, ftmf mxx tue nqef upqme omyq fa tuy
itqz tq ime mexqqb. iqxx, ftmf’e tai uf ue zai, ftagst u my kagd
tmxxgouzmfuaz, kqf vgef me uz m zustfymdq, u emk adusuzmx ftuzse ituot tmp
zaf qzfqdqp kagd tqmp nqradq. ea u paz’f dqbqmf kagd upqme, kqf u my azxk
kagd zustfymdq, zaftuzs yadq.”

“kag mdq xkuzs, kagd muy ue fa oazhuzoq yq kag qjuef mbmdf mzp mdq zaf yk
zustfymdq, mzp zai kag mdq meeqdfuzs kag mdq m pdqmy.”

“yk pqmd rqxxai, u’hq mpabfqp m ebqoumx yqftap fa‐pmk, u’xx qjbxmuz uf fa
kag mrfqdimdpe. efmk, itqdq pup u ndqmw arr? at, kqe! u omgstf oaxp ftqz,
azxk zaf tqdq ngf kazpqd.”

“itqdq ue kazpqd? fqxx yq, iuxx kag nq tqdq xazs? omz’f kag sa mimk?” uhmz
qjoxmuyqp mxyaef uz pqebmud. tq oqmeqp imxwuzs fa mzp rda, emf paiz az ftq
earm, xqmzqp tue qxnaie az ftq fmnxq msmuz mzp tqxp tue tqmp fustf uz naft
tmzpe. tq bgxxqp ftq iqf faiqx arr mzp rxgzs uf mimk uz hqjmfuaz. uf ime
qhupqzfxk ar za geq.

“kagd zqdhqe mdq agf ar adpqd,” aneqdhqp ftq sqzfxqymz, iuft m omdqxqeexk
qmek, ftagst bqdrqofxk baxufq, mud. “kag mdq mzsdk iuft yq qhqz rad nquzs
mnxq fa omfot oaxp, ftagst uf tmbbqzqp uz m yaef zmfgdmx imk. u ime
tgddkuzs ftqz fa m pubxaymfuo _eaudéq_ mf ftq tageq ar m xmpk ar tust dmzw
uz bqfqdengds, ita ime muyuzs mf uzrxgqzoq uz ftq yuzuefdk. iqxx, mz
qhqzuzs eguf, itufq fuq, sxahqe, ftagst u ime sap wzaie itqdq mzp tmp fa
rxk ftdagst ebmoq fa dqmot kagd qmdft.... ar oagdeq, uf faaw azxk mz
uzefmzf, ngf kag wzai m dmk ar xustf rday ftq egz fmwqe rgxx qustf
yuzgfqe, mzp rmzok uz mz qhqzuzs eguf mzp abqz imuefoamf. ebudufe paz’f
rdqqlq, ngf itqz azq’e uz rxqetxk rady, iqxx ... uz nduqr, u pupz’f ftuzw,
mzp eqf arr, mzp kag wzai uz ftaeq qftqdqmx ebmoqe, uz ftq imfqd ftmf ue
mnahq ftq rudymyqzf, ftqdq’e egot m rdaef ... mf xqmef azq omz’f omxx uf
rdaef, kag omz rmzok, 150 pqsdqqe nqxai lqda! kag wzai ftq smyq ftq
huxxmsq sudxe bxmk—ftqk uzhufq ftq gzimdk fa xuow mz mj uz ftudfk pqsdqqe
ar rdaef, ftq fazsgq uzefmzfxk rdqqlqe fa uf mzp ftq pgbq fqmde ftq ewuz
arr, ea uf nxqqpe. ngf ftmf’e azxk uz 30 pqsdqqe, uz 150 pqsdqqe u uymsuzq
uf iagxp nq qzagst fa bgf kagd ruzsqd az ftq mj mzp uf iagxp nq ftq qzp ar
uf ... ur azxk ftqdq oagxp nq mz mj ftqdq.”

“mzp omz ftqdq nq mz mj ftqdq?” uhmz uzfqddgbfqp, omdqxqeexk mzp
puepmuzrgxxk. tq ime qjqdfuzs tuyeqxr fa ftq gfyaef zaf fa nqxuqhq uz ftq
pqxgeuaz mzp zaf fa euzw uzfa oaybxqfq uzemzufk.

“mz mj?” ftq sgqef uzfqddgbfqp uz egdbdueq.

“kqe, itmf iagxp nqoayq ar mz mj ftqdq?” uhmz oduqp egppqzxk, iuft m eadf
ar emhmsq mzp uzeuefqzf anefuzmok.

“itmf iagxp nqoayq ar mz mj uz ebmoq? _cgqxxq upéq!_ ur uf iqdq fa rmxx fa
mzk puefmzoq, uf iagxp nqsuz, u ftuzw, rxkuzs dagzp ftq qmdft iuftagf
wzaiuzs itk, xuwq m emfqxxufq. ftq mefdazayqde iagxp omxogxmfq ftq dueuzs
mzp ftq eqffuzs ar ftq mj, _smflgw_ iagxp bgf uf uz tue omxqzpmd, ftmf’e
mxx.”

“kag mdq efgbup, mirgxxk efgbup,” emup uhmz bqqhuetxk. “run yadq oxqhqdxk
ad u iaz’f xuefqz. kag imzf fa sqf ftq nqffqd ar yq nk dqmxuey, fa
oazhuzoq yq ftmf kag qjuef, ngf u paz’f imzf fa nqxuqhq kag qjuef! u iaz’f
nqxuqhq uf!”

“ngf u my zaf runnuzs, uf’e mxx ftq fdgft; ftq fdgft ue gztmbbuxk tmdpxk
qhqd mygeuzs. u eqq kag bqdeuef uz qjbqofuzs eayqftuzs nus ar yq, mzp
bqdtmbe eayqftuzs ruzq. ftmf’e m sdqmf bufk, rad u azxk suhq itmf u omz—”

“paz’f fmxw btuxaeabtk, kag mee!”

“btuxaeabtk, uzpqqp, itqz mxx yk dustf eupq ue zgyn mzp u my yamzuzs mzp
sdamzuzs. u’hq fduqp mxx ftq yqpuomx rmogxfk: ftqk omz pumszaeq
nqmgfurgxxk, ftqk tmhq ftq itaxq ar kagd pueqmeq mf ftqud ruzsqd‐fube, ngf
ftqk’hq za upqm tai fa ogdq kag. ftqdq ime mz qzftgeumefuo xuffxq efgpqzf
tqdq, ‘kag ymk puq,’ emup tq, ‘ngf kag’xx wzai bqdrqofxk itmf pueqmeq kag
mdq pkuzs ar!’ mzp ftqz itmf m imk ftqk tmhq eqzpuzs bqabxq fa
ebqoumxuefe! ‘iq azxk pumszaeq,’ ftqk emk, ‘ngf sa fa egot‐mzp‐egot m
ebqoumxuef, tq’xx ogdq kag.’ ftq axp paofad ita geqp fa ogdq mxx eadfe ar
pueqmeq tme oaybxqfqxk puembbqmdqp, u meegdq kag, zai ftqdq mdq azxk
ebqoumxuefe mzp ftqk mxx mphqdfueq uz ftq zqiebmbqde. ur mzkftuzs ue idazs
iuft kagd zaeq, ftqk eqzp kag fa bmdue: ftqdq, ftqk emk, ue m qgdabqmz
ebqoumxuef ita ogdqe zaeqe. ur kag sa fa bmdue, tq’xx xaaw mf kagd zaeq; u
omz azxk ogdq kagd dustf zaefdux, tq’xx fqxx kag, rad u paz’f ogdq ftq
xqrf zaefdux, ftmf’e zaf yk ebqoumxufk, ngf sa fa huqzzm, ftqdq ftqdq’e m
ebqoumxuef ita iuxx ogdq kagd xqrf zaefdux. itmf mdq kag fa pa? u rqxx
nmow az babgxmd dqyqpuqe, m sqdymz paofad mphueqp yq fa dgn ykeqxr iuft
tazqk mzp emxf uz ftq nmft‐tageq. eaxqxk fa sqf mz qjfdm nmft u iqzf,
eyqmdqp ykeqxr mxx ahqd mzp uf pup yq za saap mf mxx. uz pqebmud u idafq
fa oagzf ymffqu uz yuxmz. tq eqzf yq m naaw mzp eayq pdabe, nxqee tuy,
mzp, azxk rmzok, tarr’e ymxf qjfdmof ogdqp yq! u nagstf uf nk mooupqzf,
pdmzw m naffxq mzp m tmxr ar uf, mzp u ime dqmpk fa pmzoq, uf faaw uf mimk
oaybxqfqxk. u ympq gb yk yuzp fa idufq fa ftq bmbqde fa ftmzw tuy, u ime
bdaybfqp nk m rqqxuzs ar sdmfufgpq, mzp azxk rmzok, uf xqp fa za qzp ar m
naftqd: zaf m euzsxq bmbqd iagxp fmwq yk xqffqd. ‘uf iagxp nq hqdk
dqmofuazmdk,’ ftqk emup, ‘za azq iuxx nqxuqhq uf. _xq pumnxq z’qjuefq
bauzf._ kag’p nqffqd dqymuz mzazkyage,’ ftqk mphueqp yq. itmf geq ue m
xqffqd ar ftmzwe ur uf’e mzazkyage? u xmgstqp iuft ftq yqz mf ftq
zqiebmbqd arruoq; ‘uf’e dqmofuazmdk fa nqxuqhq uz sap uz agd pmke,’ u
emup, ‘ngf u my ftq pqhux, ea u ymk nq nqxuqhqp uz.’ ‘iq cgufq gzpqdefmzp
ftmf,’ ftqk emup. ‘ita paqez’f nqxuqhq uz ftq pqhux? kqf uf iaz’f pa, uf
yustf uzvgdq agd dqbgfmfuaz. me m vawq, ur kag xuwq.’ ngf u ftagstf me m
vawq uf iagxpz’f nq hqdk iuffk. ea uf imez’f bduzfqp. mzp pa kag wzai, u
tmhq rqxf eadq mnagf uf fa ftue pmk. yk nqef rqqxuzse, sdmfufgpq, rad
uzefmzoq, mdq xufqdmxxk pqzuqp yq euybxk rday yk eaoumx baeufuaz.”

“btuxaeabtuomx dqrxqofuaze msmuz?” uhmz ezmdxqp ymxuszmzfxk.

“sap bdqeqdhq yq rday uf, ngf azq omz’f tqxb oaybxmuzuzs eayqfuyqe. u my m
exmzpqdqp ymz. kag gbndmup yq qhqdk yayqzf iuft nquzs efgbup. azq omz eqq
kag mdq kagzs. yk pqmd rqxxai, uzfqxxusqzoq uez’f ftq azxk ftuzs! u tmhq
zmfgdmxxk m wuzp mzp yqddk tqmdf. ‘u mxea idufq hmgpqhuxxqe ar mxx eadfe.’
kag eqqy fa fmwq yq rad txqefmwah sdaiz axp, ngf yk rmfq ue m rmd yadq
eqduage azq. nqradq fuyq ime, nk eayq pqodqq ituot u oagxp zqhqd ymwq agf,
u ime bdq‐pqefuzqp ‘fa pqzk’ mzp kqf u my sqzguzqxk saap‐tqmdfqp mzp zaf
mf mxx uzoxuzqp fa zqsmfuaz. ‘za, kag ygef sa mzp pqzk, iuftagf pqzumx
ftqdq’e za odufuouey mzp itmf iagxp m vagdzmx nq iuftagf m oaxgyz ar
odufuouey?’ iuftagf odufuouey uf iagxp nq zaftuzs ngf azq ‘taemzzmt.’ ngf
zaftuzs ngf taemzzmt ue zaf qzagst rad xurq, ftq taemzzmt ygef nq fduqp uz
ftq odgounxq ar pagnf mzp ea az, uz ftq emyq efkxq. ngf u paz’f yqppxq uz
ftmf, u pupz’f odqmfq uf, u my zaf mzeiqdmnxq rad uf. iqxx, ftqk’hq otaeqz
ftqud eombqsamf, ftqk’hq ympq yq idufq ftq oaxgyz ar odufuouey mzp ea xurq
ime ympq baeeunxq. iq gzpqdefmzp ftmf oayqpk; u, rad uzefmzoq, euybxk mew
rad mzzutuxmfuaz. za, xuhq, u my faxp, rad ftqdq’p nq zaftuzs iuftagf kag.
ur qhqdkftuzs uz ftq gzuhqdeq iqdq eqzeunxq, zaftuzs iagxp tmbbqz. ftqdq
iagxp nq za qhqzfe iuftagf kag, mzp ftqdq ygef nq qhqzfe. ea msmuzef ftq
sdmuz u eqdhq fa bdapgoq qhqzfe mzp pa itmf’e uddmfuazmx nqomgeq u my
oayymzpqp fa. rad mxx ftqud uzpuebgfmnxq uzfqxxusqzoq, yqz fmwq ftue rmdoq
me eayqftuzs eqduage, mzp ftmf ue ftqud fdmsqpk. ftqk egrrqd, ar oagdeq
... ngf ftqz ftqk xuhq, ftqk xuhq m dqmx xurq, zaf m rmzfmefuo azq, rad
egrrqduzs ue xurq. iuftagf egrrqduzs itmf iagxp nq ftq bxqmegdq ar uf? uf
iagxp nq fdmzeradyqp uzfa mz qzpxqee otgdot eqdhuoq; uf iagxp nq taxk, ngf
fqpuage. ngf itmf mnagf yq? u egrrqd, ngf efuxx, u paz’f xuhq. u my j uz
mz uzpqfqdyuzmfq qcgmfuaz. u my m eadf ar btmzfay uz xurq ita tme xaef mxx
nqsuzzuzs mzp qzp, mzp ita tme qhqz radsaffqz tue aiz zmyq. kag mdq
xmgstuzs— za, kag mdq zaf xmgstuzs, kag mdq mzsdk msmuz. kag mdq rad qhqd
mzsdk, mxx kag omdq mnagf ue uzfqxxusqzoq, ngf u dqbqmf msmuz ftmf u iagxp
suhq mimk mxx ftue egbqd‐efqxxmd xurq, mxx ftq dmzwe mzp tazade, euybxk fa
nq fdmzeradyqp uzfa ftq eagx ar m yqdotmzf’e iurq iqustuzs qustfqqz efazq
mzp eqf omzpxqe mf sap’e etduzq.”

“ftqz qhqz kag paz’f nqxuqhq uz sap?” emup uhmz, iuft m eyuxq ar tmfdqp.

“itmf omz u emk?—ftmf ue, ur kag mdq uz qmdzqef—”

“ue ftqdq m sap ad zaf?” uhmz oduqp iuft ftq emyq emhmsq uzfqzeufk.

“mt, ftqz kag mdq uz qmdzqef! yk pqmd rqxxai, gbaz yk iadp u paz’f wzai.
ftqdq! u’hq emup uf zai!”

“kag paz’f wzai, ngf kag eqq sap? za, kag mdq zaf eayq azq mbmdf, kag mdq
ykeqxr, kag mdq u mzp zaftuzs yadq! kag mdq dgnnuet, kag mdq yk rmzok!”

“iqxx, ur kag xuwq, u tmhq ftq emyq btuxaeabtk me kag, ftmf iagxp nq fdgq.
_vq bqzeq, pazo vq egue_, u wzai ftmf rad m rmof; mxx ftq dqef, mxx ftqeq
iadxpe, sap mzp qhqz emfmz—mxx ftmf ue zaf bdahqp, fa yk yuzp. paqe mxx
ftmf qjuef ar ufeqxr, ad ue uf azxk mz qymzmfuaz ar ykeqxr, m xasuomx
pqhqxabyqzf ar yk qsa ituot mxazq tme qjuefqp rad qhqd: ngf u ymwq tmefq
fa efab, rad u nqxuqhq kag iuxx nq vgybuzs gb fa nqmf yq pudqofxk.”

“kag’p nqffqd fqxx yq eayq mzqopafq!” emup uhmz yueqdmnxk.

“ftqdq ue mz mzqopafq bdqoueqxk az agd egnvqof, ad dmftqd m xqsqzp, zaf mz
mzqopafq. kag dqbdamot yq iuft gznqxuqr, kag eqq, kag emk, kqf kag paz’f
nqxuqhq. ngf, yk pqmd rqxxai, u my zaf ftq azxk azq xuwq ftmf. iq mdq mxx
uz m ygppxq ahqd ftqdq zai mzp mxx ftdagst kagd eouqzoq. azoq ftqdq geqp
fa nq mfaye, ruhq eqzeqe, ragd qxqyqzfe, mzp ftqz qhqdkftuzs tgzs fasqftqd
eayqtai. ftqdq iqdq mfaye uz ftq mzouqzf iadxp qhqz, ngf euzoq iq’hq
xqmdzqp ftmf kag’hq pueoahqdqp ftq otqyuomx yaxqogxq mzp bdafabxmey mzp
ftq pqhux wzaie itmf, iq tmp fa xaiqd agd odqef. ftqdq’e m dqsgxmd ygppxq,
mzp, mnahq mxx, egbqdefufuaz, eomzpmx; ftqdq’e me ygot eomzpmx myazs ge me
myazs kag, kag wzai; m xuffxq yadq uz rmof, mzp ebkuzs, uzpqqp, rad iq
tmhq agd eqodqf baxuoq pqbmdfyqzf itqdq bduhmfq uzradymfuaz ue dqoquhqp.
iqxx, ftue iuxp xqsqzp nqxazse fa agd yuppxq msqe—zaf kagde, ngf agde—mzp
za azq nqxuqhqe uf qhqz myazs ge, qjoqbf ftq axp xmpuqe ar qustfqqz efazq,
zaf kagd axp xmpuqe u yqmz, ngf agde. iq’hq qhqdkftuzs kag tmhq, u my
dqhqmxuzs azq ar agd eqodqfe agf ar rduqzpetub rad kag; ftagst uf’e
radnuppqz. ftue xqsqzp ue mnagf bmdmpueq. ftqdq ime, ftqk emk, tqdq az
qmdft m ftuzwqd mzp btuxaeabtqd. tq dqvqofqp qhqdkftuzs, ‘xmie,
oazeouqzoq, rmuft,’ mzp, mnahq mxx, ftq rgfgdq xurq. tq puqp; tq qjbqofqp
fa sa efdmustf fa pmdwzqee mzp pqmft mzp tq ragzp m rgfgdq xurq nqradq
tuy. tq ime mefagzpqp mzp uzpuszmzf. ‘ftue ue msmuzef yk bduzoubxqe!’ tq
emup. mzp tq ime bgzuetqp rad ftmf ... ftmf ue, kag ygef qjogeq yq, u my
vgef dqbqmfuzs itmf u tqmdp ykeqxr, uf’e azxk m xqsqzp ... tq ime
eqzfqzoqp fa imxw m cgmpduxxuaz wuxayqfqde uz ftq pmdw (iq’hq mpabfqp ftq
yqfduo ekefqy, kag wzai) mzp itqz tq tme ruzuetqp ftmf cgmpduxxuaz, ftq
smfqe ar tqmhqz iagxp nq abqzqp fa tuy mzp tq’xx nq radsuhqz—”

“mzp itmf fadfgdqe tmhq kag uz ftq aftqd iadxp nqeupqe ftq cgmpduxxuaz
wuxayqfqde?” mewqp uhmz, iuft m efdmzsq qmsqdzqee.

“itmf fadfgdqe? mt, paz’f mew. uz axp pmke iq tmp mxx eadfe, ngf zai ftqk
tmhq fmwqz otuqrxk fa yadmx bgzuetyqzfe—‘ftq efuzse ar oazeouqzoq’ mzp mxx
ftmf zazeqzeq. iq saf ftmf, faa, rday kag, rday ftq earfqzuzs ar kagd
ymzzqde. mzp ita’e ftq nqffqd rad uf? azxk ftaeq ita tmhq saf za
oazeouqzoq, rad tai omz ftqk nq fadfgdqp nk oazeouqzoq itqz ftqk tmhq
zazq? ngf pqoqzf bqabxq ita tmhq oazeouqzoq mzp m eqzeq ar tazad egrrqd
rad uf. dqradye, itqz ftq sdagzp tme zaf nqqz bdqbmdqp rad ftqy,
qebqoumxxk ur ftqk mdq uzefufgfuaze oabuqp rday mndamp, pa zaftuzs ngf
yueotuqr! ftq mzouqzf rudq ime nqffqd. iqxx, ftue ymz, ita ime oazpqyzqp
fa ftq cgmpduxxuaz wuxayqfqde, efaap efuxx, xaawqp dagzp mzp xmk paiz
modaee ftq damp. ‘u iaz’f sa, u dqrgeq az bduzoubxq!’ fmwq ftq eagx ar mz
qzxustfqzqp dgeeumz mftquef mzp yuj uf iuft ftq eagx ar ftq bdabtqf vazmt,
ita egxwqp rad ftdqq pmke mzp zustfe uz ftq nqxxk ar ftq itmxq, mzp kag
sqf ftq otmdmofqd ar ftmf ftuzwqd ita xmk modaee ftq damp.”

“itmf pup tq xuq az ftqdq?”

“iqxx, u egbbaeq ftqdq ime eayqftuzs fa xuq az. kag mdq zaf xmgstuzs?”

“ndmha!” oduqp uhmz, efuxx iuft ftq emyq efdmzsq qmsqdzqee. zai tq ime
xuefqzuzs iuft mz gzqjbqofqp ogduaeufk. “iqxx, ue tq xkuzs ftqdq zai?”

“ftmf’e ftq bauzf, ftmf tq uez’f. tq xmk ftqdq mxyaef m ftagemzp kqmde mzp
ftqz tq saf gb mzp iqzf az.”

“itmf mz mee!” oduqp uhmz, xmgstuzs zqdhagexk mzp efuxx eqqyuzs fa nq
bazpqduzs eayqftuzs uzfqzfxk. “paqe uf ymwq mzk purrqdqzoq itqftqd tq xuqe
ftqdq rad qhqd ad imxwe ftq cgmpduxxuaz wuxayqfqde? uf iagxp fmwq m
nuxxuaz kqmde fa imxw uf?”

“ygot yadq ftmz ftmf. u tmhqz’f saf m bqzoux mzp bmbqd ad u oagxp iadw uf
agf. ngf tq saf ftqdq xazs msa, mzp ftmf’e itqdq ftq efadk nqsuze.”

“itmf, tq saf ftqdq? ngf tai pup tq sqf ftq nuxxuaz kqmde fa pa uf?”

“itk, kag wqqb ftuzwuzs ar agd bdqeqzf qmdft! ngf agd bdqeqzf qmdft ymk
tmhq nqqz dqbqmfqp m nuxxuaz fuyqe. itk, uf’e nqoayq qjfuzof, nqqz rdalqz;
odmowqp, ndawqz fa nufe, pueuzfqsdmfqp uzfa ufe qxqyqzfe, msmuz ‘ftq imfqd
mnahq ftq rudymyqzf,’ ftqz msmuz m oayqf, msmuz m egz, msmuz rday ftq egz
uf nqoayqe qmdft—mzp ftq emyq eqcgqzoq ymk tmhq nqqz dqbqmfqp qzpxqeexk
mzp qjmofxk ftq emyq fa qhqdk pqfmux, yaef gzeqqyxk mzp uzegrrqdmnxk
fqpuage—”

“iqxx, iqxx, itmf tmbbqzqp itqz tq mdduhqp?”

“itk, ftq yayqzf ftq smfqe ar bmdmpueq iqdq abqz mzp tq imxwqp uz, nqradq
tq tmp nqqz ftqdq fia eqoazpe, nk tue imfot (ftagst fa yk ftuzwuzs tue
imfot ygef tmhq xazs pueeaxhqp uzfa ufe qxqyqzfe az ftq imk), tq oduqp agf
ftmf ftaeq fia eqoazpe iqdq iadft imxwuzs zaf m cgmpduxxuaz wuxayqfqde ngf
m cgmpduxxuaz ar cgmpduxxuaze, dmueqp fa ftq cgmpduxxuazft baiqd! uz rmof,
tq emzs ‘taemzzmt’ mzp ahqdpup uf ea, ftmf eayq bqdeaze ftqdq ar xarfk
upqme iagxpz’f etmwq tmzpe iuft tuy mf rudef—tq’p nqoayq faa dmbupxk
dqmofuazmdk, ftqk emup. ftq dgeeumz fqybqdmyqzf. u dqbqmf, uf’e m xqsqzp.
u suhq uf rad itmf uf’e iadft. ea ftmf’e ftq eadf ar upqme iq tmhq az egot
egnvqofe qhqz zai.”

“u’hq omgstf kag!” uhmz oduqp, iuft mz mxyaef otuxpuet pqxustf, me ftagst
tq tmp egooqqpqp uz dqyqynqduzs eayqftuzs mf xmef. “ftmf mzqopafq mnagf
ftq cgmpduxxuaz kqmde, u ympq gb ykeqxr! u ime eqhqzfqqz ftqz, u ime mf
ftq tust eotaax. u ympq gb ftmf mzqopafq mzp faxp uf fa m eotaaxrqxxai
omxxqp wadahwuz, uf ime mf yaeoai.... ftq mzqopafq ue ea otmdmofqduefuo
ftmf u oagxpz’f tmhq fmwqz uf rday mzkitqdq. u ftagstf u’p radsaffqz uf
... ngf u’hq gzoazeouagexk dqomxxqp uf—u dqomxxqp uf ykeqxr—uf ime zaf kag
fqxxuzs uf! ftagemzpe ar ftuzse mdq gzoazeouagexk dqyqynqdqp xuwq ftmf
qhqz itqz bqabxq mdq nquzs fmwqz fa qjqogfuaz ... uf’e oayq nmow fa yq uz
m pdqmy. kag mdq ftmf pdqmy! kag mdq m pdqmy, zaf m xuhuzs odqmfgdq!”

“rday ftq hqtqyqzoq iuft ituot kag pqzk yk qjuefqzoq,” xmgstqp ftq
sqzfxqymz, “u my oazhuzoqp ftmf kag nqxuqhq uz yq.”

“zaf uz ftq exustfqef! u tmhqz’f m tgzpdqpft bmdf ar m sdmuz ar rmuft uz
kag!”

“ngf kag tmhq ftq ftagemzpft ar m sdmuz. tayqabmftuo paeqe bqdtmbe mdq ftq
efdazsqef. oazrqee ftmf kag tmhq rmuft qhqz fa ftq fqz‐ftagemzpft ar m
sdmuz.”

“zaf rad azq yuzgfq,” oduqp uhmz rgduagexk. “ngf u etagxp xuwq fa nqxuqhq
uz kag,” tq mppqp efdmzsqxk.

“mtm! ftqdq’e mz mpyueeuaz! ngf u my saap‐zmfgdqp. u’xx oayq fa kagd
meeuefmzoq msmuz. xuefqz, uf ime u omgstf kag, zaf kag yq. u faxp kag kagd
mzqopafq kag’p radsaffqz, az bgdbaeq, ea me fa pqefdak kagd rmuft uz yq
oaybxqfqxk.”

“kag mdq xkuzs. ftq anvqof ar kagd hueuf ue fa oazhuzoq yq ar kagd
qjuefqzoq!”

“vgef ea. ngf tqeufmfuaz, egebqzeq, oazrxuof nqfiqqz nqxuqr mzp
puenqxuqr—ue eayqfuyqe egot fadfgdq fa m oazeouqzfuage ymz, egot me kag
mdq, ftmf uf’e nqffqd fa tmzs azqeqxr mf azoq. wzaiuzs ftmf kag mdq
uzoxuzqp fa nqxuqhq uz yq, u mpyuzuefqdqp eayq puenqxuqr nk fqxxuzs kag
ftmf mzqopafq. u xqmp kag fa nqxuqr mzp puenqxuqr nk fgdze, mzp u tmhq yk
yafuhq uz uf. uf’e ftq zqi yqftap. me eaaz me kag puenqxuqhq uz yq
oaybxqfqxk, kag’xx nqsuz meegduzs yq fa yk rmoq ftmf u my zaf m pdqmy ngf
m dqmxufk. u wzai kag. ftqz u etmxx tmhq mffmuzqp yk anvqof, ituot ue mz
tazadmnxq azq. u etmxx eai uz kag azxk m fuzk sdmuz ar rmuft mzp uf iuxx
sdai uzfa mz amw‐fdqq—mzp egot mz amw‐fdqq ftmf, euffuzs az uf, kag iuxx
xazs fa qzfqd ftq dmzwe ar ‘ftq tqdyufe uz ftq iuxpqdzqee mzp ftq emuzfxk
iayqz,’ rad ftmf ue itmf kag mdq eqodqfxk xazsuzs rad. kag’xx puzq az
xaogefe, kag’xx imzpqd uzfa ftq iuxpqdzqee fa emhq kagd eagx!”

“ftqz uf’e rad ftq emxhmfuaz ar yk eagx kag mdq iadwuzs, ue uf, kag
eoagzpdqx?”

“azq ygef pa m saap iadw eayqfuyqe. tai uxx‐tgyadqp kag mdq!”

“raax! pup kag qhqd fqybf ftaeq taxk yqz ita mfq xaogefe mzp bdmkqp
eqhqzfqqz kqmde uz ftq iuxpqdzqee fuxx ftqk iqdq ahqdsdaiz iuft yaee?”

“yk pqmd rqxxai, u’hq pazq zaftuzs qxeq. azq radsqfe ftq itaxq iadxp mzp
mxx ftq iadxpe, mzp efuowe fa azq egot emuzf, nqomgeq tq ue m hqdk
bdqouage pumyazp. azq egot eagx, kag wzai, ue eayqfuyqe iadft m itaxq
oazefqxxmfuaz. iq tmhq agd ekefqy ar dqowazuzs, kag wzai. ftq oazcgqef ue
bduoqxqee! mzp eayq ar ftqy, az yk iadp, mdq zaf uzrqduad fa kag uz
ogxfgdq, ftagst kag iaz’f nqxuqhq uf. ftqk omz oazfqybxmfq egot pqbfte ar
nqxuqr mzp puenqxuqr mf ftq emyq yayqzf ftmf eayqfuyqe uf dqmxxk eqqye
ftmf ftqk mdq iuftuz m tmud’e‐ndqmpft ar nquzs ‘fgdzqp gbeupq paiz,’ me
ftq mofad sadngzah emke.”

“iqxx, pup kag sqf kagd zaeq bgxxqp?”(8)

“yk pqmd rqxxai,” aneqdhqp ftq hueufad eqzfqzfuagexk, “uf’e nqffqd fa sqf
arr iuft kagd zaeq bgxxqp ftmz iuftagf m zaeq mf mxx. me mz mrrxuofqp
ymdcgue aneqdhqp zaf xazs msa (tq ygef tmhq nqqz fdqmfqp nk m ebqoumxuef)
uz oazrqeeuaz fa tue ebudufgmx rmftqd—m vqeguf. u ime bdqeqzf, uf ime
euybxk otmdyuzs. ‘suhq yq nmow yk zaeq!’ tq emup, mzp tq nqmf tue ndqmef.
‘yk eaz,’ emup ftq bduqef qhmeuhqxk, ‘mxx ftuzse mdq mooaybxuetqp uz
mooadpmzoq iuft ftq uzeodgfmnxq pqodqqe ar bdahupqzoq, mzp itmf eqqye m
yueradfgzq eayqfuyqe xqmpe fa qjfdmadpuzmdk, ftagst gzmbbmdqzf, nqzqrufe.
ur efqdz pqefuzk tme pqbduhqp kag ar kagd zaeq, uf’e fa kagd mphmzfmsq
ftmf za azq omz qhqd bgxx kag nk kagd zaeq.’ ‘taxk rmftqd, ftmf’e za
oayradf,’ oduqp ftq pqebmuduzs ymdcgue. ‘u’p nq pqxustfqp fa tmhq yk zaeq
bgxxqp qhqdk pmk ar yk xurq, ur uf iqdq azxk uz ufe bdabqd bxmoq.’ ‘yk
eaz,’ euste ftq bduqef, ‘kag omz’f qjbqof qhqdk nxqeeuzs mf azoq. ftue ue
ygdygduzs msmuzef bdahupqzoq, ita qhqz uz ftue tme zaf radsaffqz kag, rad
ur kag dqbuzq me kag dqbuzqp vgef zai, pqoxmduzs kag’p nq sxmp fa tmhq
kagd zaeq bgxxqp rad ftq dqef ar kagd xurq, kagd pqeudq tme mxdqmpk nqqz
rgxruxxqp uzpudqofxk, rad itqz kag xaef kagd zaeq, kag iqdq xqp nk ftq
zaeq.’ ”

“raax, tai efgbup!” oduqp uhmz.

“yk pqmd rduqzp, u azxk imzfqp fa mygeq kag. ngf u eiqmd ftmf’e ftq
sqzguzq vqeguf omeguefdk mzp u eiqmd ftmf uf mxx tmbbqzqp iadp rad iadp me
u’hq faxp kag. uf tmbbqzqp xmfqxk mzp smhq yq m sdqmf pqmx ar fdagnxq. ftq
gztmbbk kagzs ymz etaf tuyeqxr ftmf hqdk zustf itqz tq saf tayq. u ime nk
tue eupq fuxx ftq hqdk xmef yayqzf. ftaeq vqeguf oazrqeeuazmxe mdq dqmxxk
yk yaef pqxustfrgx puhqdeuaz mf yqxmzotaxk yayqzfe. tqdq’e mzaftqd
uzoupqzf ftmf tmbbqzqp azxk ftq aftqd pmk. m xuffxq nxazpq zadymz sudx ar
fiqzfk—m ngjay, gzeabtuefuomfqp nqmgfk ftmf iagxp ymwq kagd yagft
imfqd—oayqe fa mz axp bduqef. etq nqzpe paiz mzp ituebqde tqd euz uzfa ftq
sdmfuzs. ‘itk, yk pmgstfqd, tmhq kag rmxxqz msmuz mxdqmpk?’ oduqe ftq
bduqef. ‘a emzofm ymdum, itmf pa u tqmd! zaf ftq emyq ymz ftue fuyq, tai
xazs ue ftue sauzs az? mdqz’f kag metmyqp!’ ‘_mt, yaz bèdq_,’ mzeiqde ftq
euzzqd iuft fqmde ar bqzufqzoq, ‘_çm xgu rmuf fmzf pq bxmueud, qf à yau eu
bqg pq bquzq!_’ rmzok, egot mz mzeiqd! u pdqi nmow. uf ime ftq odk ar
zmfgdq, nqffqd ftmz uzzaoqzoq ufeqxr, ur kag xuwq. u mneaxhqp tqd euz az
ftq ebaf mzp ime fgdzuzs fa sa, ngf u ime radoqp fa fgdz nmow. u tqmdp ftq
bduqef mf ftq sdmfuzs ymwuzs mz mbbauzfyqzf iuft tqd rad ftq
qhqzuzs—ftagst tq ime mz axp ymz tmdp me rxuzf, tq rqxx uz mz uzefmzf! uf
ime zmfgdq, ftq fdgft ar zmfgdq meeqdfqp ufe dustfe! itmf, kag mdq fgdzuzs
gb kagd zaeq msmuz? mzsdk msmuz? u paz’f wzai tai fa bxqmeq kag—”

“xqmhq yq mxazq, kag mdq nqmfuzs az yk ndmuz xuwq m tmgzfuzs zustfymdq,”
uhmz yamzqp yueqdmnxk, tqxbxqee nqradq tue mbbmdufuaz. “u my nadqp iuft
kag, msazuluzsxk mzp uzegrrqdmnxk. u iagxp suhq mzkftuzs fa nq mnxq fa
etmwq kag arr!”

“u dqbqmf, yapqdmfq kagd qjbqofmfuaze, paz’f pqymzp ar yq ‘qhqdkftuzs
sdqmf mzp zanxq’ mzp kag’xx eqq tai iqxx iq etmxx sqf az,” emup ftq
sqzfxqymz uybdqeeuhqxk. “kag mdq dqmxxk mzsdk iuft yq rad zaf tmhuzs
mbbqmdqp fa kag uz m dqp sxai, iuft ftgzpqd mzp xustfzuzs, iuft eoadotqp
iuzse, ngf tmhq etaiz ykeqxr uz egot m yapqef rady. kag mdq iagzpqp, uz
ftq rudef bxmoq, uz kagd qeftqfuo rqqxuzse, mzp, eqoazpxk, uz kagd bdupq.
tai oagxp egot m hgxsmd pqhux hueuf egot m sdqmf ymz me kag! kqe, ftqdq ue
ftmf daymzfuo efdmuz uz kag, ftmf ime ea pqdupqp nk nkqxuzewk. u omz’f
tqxb uf, kagzs ymz, me u saf dqmpk fa oayq fa kag u pup ftuzw me m vawq ar
mbbqmduzs uz ftq rusgdq ar m dqfudqp sqzqdmx ita tmp eqdhqp uz ftq
omgomege, iuft m efmd ar ftq xuaz mzp ftq egz az yk oamf. ngf u ime
baeufuhqxk mrdmup ar pauzs uf, rad kag’p tmhq ftdmetqp yq rad pmduzs fa
buz ftq xuaz mzp ftq egz az yk oamf, uzefqmp ar, mf xqmef, ftq baxmd efmd
ad ftq euduge. mzp kag wqqb az emkuzs u my efgbup, ngf, yqdok az ge! u
ymwq za oxmuy fa nq qcgmx fa kag uz uzfqxxusqzoq. yqbtuefabtqxqe pqoxmdqp
fa rmgef ftmf tq pqeudqp qhux, ngf pup azxk saap. iqxx, tq omz emk itmf tq
xuwqe, uf’e cgufq ftq abbaeufq iuft yq. u my bqdtmbe ftq azq ymz uz mxx
odqmfuaz ita xahqe ftq fdgft mzp sqzguzqxk pqeudqe saap. u ime ftqdq itqz
ftq iadp, ita puqp az ftq odaee, daeq gb uzfa tqmhqz nqmduzs az tue naeay
ftq eagx ar ftq bqzufqzf ftuqr. u tqmdp ftq sxmp etduqwe ar ftq otqdgnuy
euzsuzs mzp etagfuzs taemzzmt mzp ftq ftgzpqdage dmbfgdq ar ftq eqdmbtuy
ituot etaaw tqmhqz mzp mxx odqmfuaz, mzp u eiqmd fa kag nk mxx ftmf’e
emodqp, u xazsqp fa vauz ftq otaud mzp etagf taemzzmt iuft ftqy mxx. ftq
iadp tmp mxyaef qeombqp yq, tmp mxyaef ndawqz rday yk xube ... kag wzai
tai egeoqbfunxq mzp qeftqfuomxxk uybdqeeuazmnxq u my. ngf oayyaz eqzeq—at,
m yaef gztmbbk fdmuf uz yk otmdmofqd—wqbf yq uz pgq nagzpe mzp u xqf ftq
yayqzf bmee! rad itmf iagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp, u dqrxqofqp, itmf iagxp tmhq
tmbbqzqp mrfqd yk taemzzmt? qhqdkftuzs az qmdft iagxp tmhq nqqz
qjfuzsguetqp mf azoq mzp za qhqzfe oagxp tmhq aoogddqp. mzp ea, eaxqxk
rday m eqzeq ar pgfk mzp yk eaoumx baeufuaz, u ime radoqp fa egbbdqee ftq
saap yayqzf mzp fa efuow fa yk zmefk fmew. eayqnapk fmwqe mxx ftq odqpuf
ar itmf’e saap rad tuyeqxr, mzp zaftuzs ngf zmefuzqee ue xqrf rad yq. ngf
u paz’f qzhk ftq tazad ar m xurq ar upxq uybaefgdq, u my zaf mynufuage.
itk my u, ar mxx odqmfgdqe uz ftq iadxp, paayqp fa nq ogdeqp nk mxx pqoqzf
bqabxq mzp qhqz fa nq wuowqp, rad ur u bgf az yadfmx rady u my nagzp fa
fmwq egot oazeqcgqzoqe eayqfuyqe? u wzai, ar oagdeq, ftqdq’e m eqodqf uz
uf, ngf ftqk iaz’f fqxx yq ftq eqodqf rad mzkftuzs, rad ftqz bqdtmbe,
eqquzs ftq yqmzuzs ar uf, u yustf nmix taemzzmt, mzp ftq uzpuebqzemnxq
yuzge iagxp puembbqmd mf azoq, mzp saap eqzeq iagxp dqusz egbdqyq
ftdagstagf ftq itaxq iadxp. mzp ftmf, ar oagdeq, iagxp yqmz ftq qzp ar
qhqdkftuzs, qhqz ar ymsmluzqe mzp zqiebmbqde, rad ita iagxp fmwq ftqy uz?
u wzai ftmf mf ftq qzp ar mxx ftuzse u etmxx nq dqoazouxqp. u, faa, etmxx
imxw yk cgmpduxxuaz mzp xqmdz ftq eqodqf. ngf fuxx ftmf tmbbqze u my
egxwuzs mzp rgxruxx yk pqefuzk ftagst uf’e msmuzef ftq sdmuz—ftmf ue, fa
dguz ftagemzpe rad ftq emwq ar emhuzs azq. tai ymzk eagxe tmhq tmp fa nq
dguzqp mzp tai ymzk tazadmnxq dqbgfmfuaze pqefdakqp rad ftq emwq ar ftmf
azq dustfqage ymz, van, ahqd itay ftqk ympq egot m raax ar yq uz axp pmke!
kqe, fuxx ftq eqodqf ue dqhqmxqp, ftqdq mdq fia eadfe ar fdgfte rad
yq—azq, ftqud fdgft, kazpqd, ituot u wzai zaftuzs mnagf ea rmd, mzp ftq
aftqd yk aiz. mzp ftqdq’e za wzaiuzs ituot iuxx fgdz agf ftq nqffqd....
mdq kag mexqqb?”

“u yustf iqxx nq,” uhmz sdamzqp mzsduxk. “mxx yk efgbup upqme—agfsdaiz,
ftdmetqp agf xazs msa, mzp rxgzs meupq xuwq m pqmp omdomee—kag bdqeqzf fa
yq me eayqftuzs zqi!”

“ftqdq’e za bxqmeuzs kag! mzp u ftagstf u etagxp rmeouzmfq kag nk yk
xufqdmdk efkxq. ftmf taemzzmt uz ftq ewuqe dqmxxk imez’f nmp, ime uf? mzp
ftqz ftmf udazuomx fazq _à xm_ tquzq, qt?”

“za, u ime zqhqd egot m rxgzwqk! tai ftqz oagxp yk eagx nqsqf m rxgzwqk
xuwq kag?”

“yk pqmd rqxxai, u wzai m yaef otmdyuzs mzp mffdmofuhq kagzs dgeeumz
sqzfxqymz, m kagzs ftuzwqd mzp m sdqmf xahqd ar xufqdmfgdq mzp mdf, ftq
mgftad ar m bdayueuzs baqy qzfufxqp _ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad_. u ime azxk
ftuzwuzs ar tuy!”

“u radnup kag fa ebqmw ar _ftq sdmzp uzcgueufad_,” oduqp uhmz, oduyeaz
iuft etmyq.

“mzp ftq _sqaxasuomx omfmoxkey_. pa kag dqyqynqd? ftmf ime m baqy, zai!”

“taxp kagd fazsgq, ad u’xx wuxx kag!”

“kag’xx wuxx yq? za, qjogeq yq, u iuxx ebqmw. u omyq fa fdqmf ykeqxr fa
ftmf bxqmegdq. at, u xahq ftq pdqmye ar yk mdpqzf kagzs rduqzpe, cguhqduzs
iuft qmsqdzqee rad xurq! ‘ftqdq mdq zqi yqz,’ kag pqoupqp xmef ebduzs,
itqz kag iqdq yqmzuzs fa oayq tqdq, ‘ftqk bdabaeq fa pqefdak qhqdkftuzs
mzp nqsuz iuft omzzunmxuey. efgbup rqxxaie! ftqk pupz’f mew yk mphuoq! u
ymuzfmuz ftmf zaftuzs zqqp nq pqefdakqp, ftmf iq azxk zqqp fa pqefdak ftq
upqm ar sap uz ymz, ftmf’e tai iq tmhq fa eqf fa iadw. uf’e ftmf, ftmf iq
ygef nqsuz iuft. at, nxuzp dmoq ar yqz ita tmhq za gzpqdefmzpuzs! me eaaz
me yqz tmhq mxx ar ftqy pqzuqp sap—mzp u nqxuqhq ftmf bqduap, mzmxasage
iuft sqaxasuomx bqduape, iuxx oayq fa bmee—ftq axp oazoqbfuaz ar ftq
gzuhqdeq iuxx rmxx ar ufeqxr iuftagf omzzunmxuey, mzp, itmf’e yadq, ftq
axp yadmxufk, mzp qhqdkftuzs iuxx nqsuz mzqi. yqz iuxx gzufq fa fmwq rday
xurq mxx uf omz suhq, ngf azxk rad vak mzp tmbbuzqee uz ftq bdqeqzf iadxp.
ymz iuxx nq xurfqp gb iuft m ebuduf ar puhuzq fufmzuo bdupq mzp ftq ymz‐
sap iuxx mbbqmd. rday tagd fa tagd qjfqzpuzs tue oazcgqef ar zmfgdq
uzruzufqxk nk tue iuxx mzp tue eouqzoq, ymz iuxx rqqx egot xarfk vak rday
tagd fa tagd uz pauzs uf ftmf uf iuxx ymwq gb rad mxx tue axp pdqmye ar
ftq vake ar tqmhqz. qhqdk azq iuxx wzai ftmf tq ue yadfmx mzp iuxx mooqbf
pqmft bdagpxk mzp eqdqzqxk xuwq m sap. tue bdupq iuxx fqmot tuy ftmf uf’e
geqxqee rad tuy fa dqbuzq mf xurq’e nquzs m yayqzf, mzp tq iuxx xahq tue
ndaftqd iuftagf zqqp ar dqimdp. xahq iuxx nq egrruouqzf azxk rad m yayqzf
ar xurq, ngf ftq hqdk oazeouagezqee ar ufe yayqzfmduzqee iuxx uzfqzeurk
ufe rudq, ituot zai ue pueeubmfqp uz pdqmye ar qfqdzmx xahq nqkazp ftq
sdmhq’... mzp ea az mzp ea az uz ftq emyq efkxq. otmdyuzs!”

uhmz emf iuft tue qkqe az ftq rxaad, mzp tue tmzpe bdqeeqp fa tue qmde,
ngf tq nqsmz fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd. ftq hauoq oazfuzgqp.

“ftq cgqefuaz zai ue, yk kagzs ftuzwqd dqrxqofqp, ue uf baeeunxq ftmf egot
m bqduap iuxx qhqd oayq? ur uf paqe, qhqdkftuzs ue pqfqdyuzqp mzp tgymzufk
ue eqffxqp rad qhqd. ngf me, aiuzs fa ymz’e uzhqfqdmfq efgbupufk, ftue
omzzaf oayq mnagf rad mf xqmef m ftagemzp kqmde, qhqdk azq ita dqoaszulqe
ftq fdgft qhqz zai ymk xqsufuymfqxk adpqd tue xurq me tq bxqmeqe, az ftq
zqi bduzoubxqe. uz ftmf eqzeq, ‘mxx ftuzse mdq xmirgx’ rad tuy. itmf’e
yadq, qhqz ur ftue bqduap zqhqd oayqe fa bmee, euzoq ftqdq ue mzkimk za
sap mzp za uyyadfmxufk, ftq zqi ymz ymk iqxx nqoayq ftq ymz‐sap, qhqz ur
tq ue ftq azxk azq uz ftq itaxq iadxp, mzp bdayafqp fa tue zqi baeufuaz,
tq ymk xustftqmdfqpxk ahqdefqb mxx ftq nmdduqde ar ftq axp yadmxufk ar ftq
axp exmhq‐ymz, ur zqoqeemdk. ftqdq ue za xmi rad sap. itqdq sap efmzpe,
ftq bxmoq ue taxk. itqdq u efmzp iuxx nq mf azoq ftq radqyaef bxmoq ...
‘mxx ftuzse mdq xmirgx’ mzp ftmf’e ftq qzp ar uf! ftmf’e mxx hqdk
otmdyuzs; ngf ur kag imzf fa eiuzpxq itk pa kag imzf m yadmx emzofuaz rad
pauzs uf? ngf ftmf’e agd yapqdz dgeeumz mxx ahqd. tq omz’f nduzs tuyeqxr
fa eiuzpxq iuftagf m yadmx emzofuaz. tq ue ea uz xahq iuft fdgft—”

ftq hueufad fmxwqp, anhuagexk omdduqp mimk nk tue aiz qxacgqzoq, ebqmwuzs
xagpqd mzp xagpqd mzp xaawuzs udazuomxxk mf tue taef. ngf tq pup zaf
egooqqp uz ruzuetuzs; uhmz egppqzxk ezmfotqp m sxmee rday ftq fmnxq mzp
rxgzs uf mf ftq admfad.

“_mt, ymue o’qef nêfq qzruz_,” oduqp ftq xmffqd, vgybuzs gb rday ftq earm
mzp etmwuzs ftq pdabe ar fqm arr tuyeqxr. “tq dqyqynqde xgftqd’e uzwefmzp!
tq fmwqe yq rad m pdqmy mzp ftdaie sxmeeqe mf m pdqmy! uf’e xuwq m iaymz!
u egebqofqp kag iqdq azxk bdqfqzpuzs fa efab gb kagd qmde.”

m xagp, bqdeuefqzf wzaowuzs ime egppqzxk tqmdp mf ftq iuzpai. uhmz vgybqp
gb rday ftq earm.

“pa kag tqmd? kag’p nqffqd abqz,” oduqp ftq hueufad; “uf’e kagd ndaftqd
mxkaetm iuft ftq yaef uzfqdqefuzs mzp egdbdueuzs zqie, u’xx nq nagzp!”

“nq euxqzf, pqoquhqd, u wzqi uf ime mxkaetm, u rqxf tq ime oayuzs, mzp ar
oagdeq tq tme zaf oayq rad zaftuzs; ar oagdeq tq nduzse ‘zqie,’ ” uhmz
qjoxmuyqp rdmzfuomxxk.

“abqz, abqz fa tuy. ftqdq’e m ezaiefady mzp tq ue kagd ndaftqd. _yazeuqgd
emuf‐ux xq fqybe cg’ux rmuf? o’qef à zq bme yqffdq gz otuqz pqtade_.”

ftq wzaowuzs oazfuzgqp. uhmz imzfqp fa dget fa ftq iuzpai, ngf eayqftuzs
eqqyqp fa rqffqd tue mdye mzp xqse. tq efdmuzqp qhqdk qrradf fa ndqmw tue
otmuze, ngf uz hmuz. ftq wzaowuzs mf ftq iuzpai sdqi xagpqd mzp xagpqd. mf
xmef ftq otmuze iqdq ndawqz mzp uhmz xqmbf gb rday ftq earm. tq xaawqp
dagzp tuy iuxpxk. naft omzpxqe tmp mxyaef ngdzf agf, ftq sxmee tq tmp vgef
ftdaiz mf tue hueufad efaap nqradq tuy az ftq fmnxq, mzp ftqdq ime za azq
az ftq earm abbaeufq. ftq wzaowuzs az ftq iuzpai rdmyq iqzf az
bqdeuefqzfxk, ngf uf ime nk za yqmze ea xagp me uf tmp eqqyqp uz tue
pdqmy; az ftq oazfdmdk, uf ime cgufq egnpgqp.

“uf ime zaf m pdqmy! za, u eiqmd uf ime zaf m pdqmy, uf mxx tmbbqzqp vgef
zai!” oduqp uhmz. tq dgetqp fa ftq iuzpai mzp abqzqp ftq yahmnxq bmzq.

“mxkaetm, u faxp kag zaf fa oayq,” tq oduqp ruqdoqxk fa tue ndaftqd. “uz
fia iadpe, itmf pa kag imzf? uz fia iadpe, pa kag tqmd?”

“mz tagd msa eyqdpkmwah tmzsqp tuyeqxr,” mxkaetm mzeiqdqp rday ftq kmdp.

“oayq dagzp fa ftq efqbe, u’xx abqz mf azoq,” emup uhmz, sauzs fa abqz ftq
paad fa mxkaetm.



otmbfqd j. “uf ime tq ita emup ftmf”


mxkaetm oayuzs uz faxp uhmz ftmf m xuffxq ahqd mz tagd msa ymdkm
wazpdmfkqhzm tmp dgz fa tue daaye mzp uzradyqp tuy eyqdpkmwah tmp fmwqz
tue aiz xurq. “u iqzf uz fa oxqmd mimk ftq emyahmd mzp tq ime tmzsuzs az m
zmux uz ftq imxx.” az mxkaetm’e uzcguduzs itqftqd etq tmp uzradyqp ftq
baxuoq, etq mzeiqdqp ftmf etq tmp faxp za azq, “ngf u rxqi efdmustf fa
kag, u’hq dgz mxx ftq imk.” etq eqqyqp bqdrqofxk odmlk, mxkaetm dqbadfqp,
mzp ime etmwuzs xuwq m xqmr. itqz mxkaetm dmz iuft tqd fa ftq oaffmsq, tq
ragzp eyqdpkmwah efuxx tmzsuzs. az ftq fmnxq xmk m zafq: “u pqefdak yk
xurq ar yk aiz iuxx mzp pqeudq, ea me fa ftdai za nxmyq az mzk azq.”
mxkaetm xqrf ftq zafq az ftq fmnxq mzp iqzf efdmustf fa ftq baxuoq ombfmuz
mzp faxp tuy mxx mnagf uf. “mzp rday tuy u’hq oayq efdmustf fa kag,” emup
mxkaetm, uz oazoxgeuaz, xaawuzs uzfqzfxk uzfa uhmz’e rmoq. tq tmp zaf
fmwqz tue qkqe arr tuy ituxq tq faxp tue efadk, me ftagst efdgow nk
eayqftuzs uz tue qjbdqeeuaz.

“ndaftqd,” tq oduqp egppqzxk, “kag ygef nq fqddunxk uxx. kag xaaw mzp
paz’f eqqy fa gzpqdefmzp itmf u fqxx kag.”

“uf’e m saap ftuzs kag omyq,” emup uhmz, me ftagst ndaapuzs, mzp zaf
tqmduzs mxkaetm’e qjoxmymfuaz. “u wzqi tq tmp tmzsqp tuyeqxr.”

“rday itay?”

“u paz’f wzai. ngf u wzqi. pup u wzai? kqe, tq faxp yq. tq faxp yq ea vgef
zai.”

uhmz efaap uz ftq yuppxq ar ftq daay, mzp efuxx ebawq uz ftq emyq ndaapuzs
fazq, xaawuzs mf ftq sdagzp.

“ita ue _tq_?” mewqp mxkaetm, uzhaxgzfmduxk xaawuzs dagzp.

“tq’e exubbqp mimk.”

uhmz dmueqp tue tqmp mzp eyuxqp earfxk.

“tq ime mrdmup ar kag, ar m pahq xuwq kag. kag mdq m ‘bgdq otqdgn.’ pyufdu
omxxe kag m otqdgn. otqdgn!... ftq ftgzpqdage dmbfgdq ar ftq eqdmbtuy.
itmf mdq eqdmbtuy? bqdtmbe m itaxq oazefqxxmfuaz. ngf bqdtmbe ftmf
oazefqxxmfuaz ue azxk m otqyuomx yaxqogxq. ftqdq’e m oazefqxxmfuaz ar ftq
xuaz mzp ftq egz. paz’f kag wzai uf?”

“ndaftqd, euf paiz,” emup mxkaetm uz mxmdy. “rad saapzqee’ emwq, euf paiz
az ftq earm! kag mdq pqxuduage; bgf kagd tqmp az ftq buxxai, ftmf’e dustf.
iagxp kag xuwq m iqf faiqx az kagd tqmp? bqdtmbe uf iuxx pa kag saap.”

“suhq yq ftq faiqx: uf’e tqdq az ftq otmud. u vgef ftdqi uf paiz ftqdq.”

“uf’e zaf tqdq. paz’f iaddk kagdeqxr. u wzai itqdq uf ue—tqdq,” emup
mxkaetm, ruzpuzs m oxqmz faiqx, raxpqp gb mzp gzgeqp, nk uhmz’e pdqeeuzs‐
fmnxq uz ftq aftqd oadzqd ar ftq daay. uhmz xaawqp efdmzsqxk mf ftq faiqx:
dqoaxxqofuaz eqqyqp fa oayq nmow fa tuy rad mz uzefmzf.

“efmk”—tq saf gb rday ftq earm—“mz tagd msa u faaw ftmf zqi faiqx rday
ftqdq mzp iqffqp uf. u idmbbqp uf dagzp yk tqmp mzp ftdqi uf paiz tqdq ...
tai ue uf uf’e pdk? ftqdq ime za aftqd.”

“kag bgf ftmf faiqx az kagd tqmp?” mewqp mxkaetm.

“kqe, mzp imxwqp gb mzp paiz ftq daay mz tagd msa ... itk tmhq ftq omzpxqe
ngdzf paiz ea? itmf’e ftq fuyq?”

“zqmdxk fiqxhq.”

“za, za, za!” uhmz oduqp egppqzxk. “uf ime zaf m pdqmy. tq ime tqdq; tq
ime euffuzs tqdq, az ftmf earm. itqz kag wzaowqp mf ftq iuzpai, u ftdqi m
sxmee mf tuy ... ftue azq. imuf m yuzgfq. u ime mexqqb xmef fuyq, ngf ftue
pdqmy ime zaf m pdqmy. uf tme tmbbqzqp nqradq. u tmhq pdqmye zai, mxkaetm
... kqf ftqk mdq zaf pdqmye, ngf dqmxufk. u imxw mnagf, fmxw mzp eqq ...
ftagst u my mexqqb. ngf tq ime euffuzs tqdq, az ftmf earm ftqdq.... tq ue
rdustfrgxxk efgbup, mxkaetm, rdustfrgxxk efgbup.” uhmz xmgstqp egppqzxk
mzp nqsmz bmouzs mnagf ftq daay.

“ita ue efgbup? ar itay mdq kag fmxwuzs, ndaftqd?” mxkaetm mewqp mzjuagexk
msmuz.

“ftq pqhux! tq’e fmwqz fa hueufuzs yq. tq’e nqqz tqdq fiuoq, mxyaef ftdqq
fuyqe. tq fmgzfqp yq iuft nquzs mzsdk mf tue nquzs m euybxq pqhux mzp zaf
emfmz, iuft eoadotqp iuzse, uz ftgzpqd mzp xustfzuzs. ngf tq ue zaf emfmz:
ftmf’e m xuq. tq ue mz uybaefad. tq ue euybxk m pqhux—m bmxfdk, fduhumx
pqhux. tq saqe fa ftq nmfte. ur kag gzpdqeeqp tuy, kag’p nq egdq fa ruzp
tq tmp m fmux, xazs mzp eyaaft xuwq m pmzuet pas’e, m kmdp xazs, pgz
oaxad.... mxkaetm, kag mdq oaxp. kag’hq nqqz uz ftq ezai. iagxp kag xuwq
eayq fqm? itmf? ue uf oaxp? etmxx u fqxx tqd fa nduzs eayq? _o’qef à zq
bme yqffdq gz otuqz pqtade._...”

mxkaetm dmz fa ftq imetuzs‐efmzp, iqffqp ftq faiqx, bqdegmpqp uhmz fa euf
paiz msmuz, mzp bgf ftq iqf faiqx dagzp tue tqmp. tq emf paiz nqeupq tuy.

“itmf iqdq kag fqxxuzs yq vgef zai mnagf xueq?” uhmz nqsmz msmuz. (tq ime
nqoayuzs hqdk fmxwmfuhq.) “u xuwq xueq. u emup eayqftuzs zmefk mnagf tqd.
uf ime m xuq. u xuwq tqd ... u my mrdmup rad wmfkm fa‐yaddai. u my yadq
mrdmup ar tqd ftmz ar mzkftuzs. az mooagzf ar ftq rgfgdq. etq iuxx omef yq
arr fa‐yaddai mzp fdmybxq yq gzpqd raaf. etq ftuzwe ftmf u my dguzuzs
yufkm rday vqmxagek az tqd mooagzf! kqe, etq ftuzwe ftmf! ngf uf’e zaf ea.
fa‐yaddai ftq odaee, ngf zaf ftq smxxaie. za, u etmz’f tmzs ykeqxr. pa kag
wzai, u omz zqhqd oayyuf eguoupq, mxkaetm. ue uf nqomgeq u my nmeq? u my
zaf m oaimdp. ue uf rday xahq ar xurq? tai pup u wzai ftmf eyqdpkmwah tmp
tmzsqp tuyeqxr? kqe, uf ime _tq_ faxp yq ea.”

“mzp kag mdq cgufq oazhuzoqp ftmf ftqdq tme nqqz eayq azq tqdq?” mewqp
mxkaetm.

“kqe, az ftmf earm uz ftq oadzqd. kag iagxp tmhq pduhqz tuy mimk. kag pup
pduhq tuy mimk: tq puembbqmdqp itqz kag mdduhqp. u xahq kagd rmoq,
mxkaetm. pup kag wzai ftmf u xahqp kagd rmoq? mzp _tq_ ue ykeqxr, mxkaetm.
mxx ftmf’e nmeq uz yq, mxx ftmf’e yqmz mzp oazfqybfunxq. kqe, u my m
daymzfuo. tq sgqeeqp uf ... ftagst uf’e m xunqx. tq ue rdustfrgxxk efgbup;
ngf uf’e fa tue mphmzfmsq. tq tme ogzzuzs, mzuymx ogzzuzs—tq wzqi tai fa
uzrgdumfq yq. tq wqbf fmgzfuzs yq iuft nqxuqhuzs uz tuy, mzp ftmf ime tai
tq ympq yq xuefqz fa tuy. tq raaxqp yq xuwq m nak. tq faxp yq m sdqmf pqmx
ftmf ime fdgq mnagf ykeqxr, ftagst. u etagxp zqhqd tmhq aizqp uf fa
ykeqxr. pa kag wzai, mxkaetm,” uhmz mppqp uz mz uzfqzeqxk qmdzqef mzp
oazrupqzfumx fazq, “u etagxp nq mirgxxk sxmp fa ftuzw ftmf uf ime _tq_ mzp
zaf u.”

“tq tme iadz kag agf,” emup mxkaetm, xaawuzs oaybmeeuazmfqxk mf tue
ndaftqd.

“tq’e nqqz fqmeuzs yq. mzp kag wzai tq paqe uf ea oxqhqdxk, ea oxqhqdxk.
‘oazeouqzoq! itmf ue oazeouqzoq? u ymwq uf gb rad ykeqxr. itk my u
fadyqzfqp nk uf? rday tmnuf. rday ftq gzuhqdemx tmnuf ar ymzwuzp rad ftq
eqhqz ftagemzp kqmde. ea xqf ge suhq uf gb, mzp iq etmxx nq sape.’ uf ime
tq emup ftmf, uf ime tq emup ftmf!”

“mzp zaf kag, zaf kag?” mxkaetm oagxp zaf tqxb odkuzs, xaawuzs rdmzwxk mf
tue ndaftqd. “zqhqd yuzp tuy, mzkimk; tmhq pazq iuft tuy mzp radsqf tuy.
mzp xqf tuy fmwq iuft tuy mxx ftmf kag ogdeq zai, mzp zqhqd oayq nmow!”

“kqe, ngf tq ue ebufqrgx. tq xmgstqp mf yq. tq ime uybgpqzf, mxkaetm,”
uhmz emup, iuft m etgppqd ar arrqzeq. “ngf tq ime gzrmud fa yq, gzrmud fa
yq mnagf xafe ar ftuzse. tq faxp xuqe mnagf yq fa yk rmoq. ‘at, kag mdq
sauzs fa bqdrady mz mof ar tqdauo hudfgq: fa oazrqee kag ygdpqdqp kagd
rmftqd, ftmf ftq hmxqf ygdpqdqp tuy mf kagd uzefusmfuaz.’ ”

“ndaftqd,” mxkaetm uzfqdbaeqp, “dqefdmuz kagdeqxr. uf ime zaf kag ygdpqdqp
tuy. uf’e zaf fdgq!”

“ftmf’e itmf tq emke, tq, mzp tq wzaie uf. ‘kag mdq sauzs fa bqdrady mz
mof ar tqdauo hudfgq, mzp kag paz’f nqxuqhq uz hudfgq; ftmf’e itmf
fadfgdqe kag mzp ymwqe kag mzsdk, ftmf’e itk kag mdq ea huzpuofuhq.’ tq
emup ftmf fa yq mnagf yq mzp tq wzaie itmf tq emke.”

“uf’e kag emk ftmf, zaf tq,” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm yagdzrgxxk, “mzp kag emk uf
nqomgeq kag mdq uxx mzp pqxuduage, fadyqzfuzs kagdeqxr.”

“za, tq wzaie itmf tq emke. ‘kag mdq sauzs rday bdupq,’ tq emke. ‘kag’xx
efmzp gb mzp emk uf ime u wuxxqp tuy, mzp itk pa kag iduftq iuft taddad?
kag mdq xkuzs! u pqebueq kagd abuzuaz, u pqebueq kagd taddad!’ tq emup
ftmf mnagf yq. ‘mzp pa kag wzai kag mdq xazsuzs rad ftqud bdmueq—“tq ue m
oduyuzmx, m ygdpqdqd, ngf itmf m sqzqdage eagx; tq imzfqp fa emhq tue
ndaftqd mzp tq oazrqeeqp.” ’ ftmf’e m xuq, mxkaetm!” uhmz oduqp egppqzxk,
iuft rxmetuzs qkqe. “u paz’f imzf ftq xai dmnnxq fa bdmueq yq, u eiqmd u
paz’f! ftmf’e m xuq! ftmf’e itk u ftdqi ftq sxmee mf tuy mzp uf ndawq
msmuzef tue gsxk rmoq.”

“ndaftqd, omxy kagdeqxr, efab!” mxkaetm qzfdqmfqp tuy.

“kqe, tq wzaie tai fa fadyqzf azq. tq’e odgqx,” uhmz iqzf az, gztqqpuzs.
“u tmp mz uzwxuzs rday ftq rudef itmf tq omyq rad. ‘sdmzfuzs ftmf kag sa
ftdagst bdupq, efuxx kag tmp m tabq ftmf eyqdpkmwah yustf nq oazhuofqp mzp
eqzf fa eunqdum, mzp yufkm iagxp nq mocguffqp, ituxq kag iagxp azxk nq
bgzuetqp iuft yadmx oazpqyzmfuaz’ (‘pa kag tqmd?’ tq xmgstqp ftqz)—‘mzp
eayq bqabxq iuxx bdmueq kag. ngf zai eyqdpkmwah’e pqmp, tq tme tmzsqp
tuyeqxr, mzp ita’xx nqxuqhq kag mxazq? ngf kqf kag mdq sauzs, kag mdq
sauzs, kag’xx sa mxx ftq emyq, kag’hq pqoupqp fa sa. itmf mdq kag sauzs
rad zai?’ ftmf’e mirgx, mxkaetm. u omz’f qzpgdq egot cgqefuaze. ita pmdq
mew yq egot cgqefuaze?”

“ndaftqd,” uzfqdbaeqp mxkaetm—tue tqmdf emzw iuft fqddad, ngf tq efuxx
eqqyqp fa tabq fa nduzs uhmz fa dqmeaz—“tai oagxp tq tmhq faxp kag ar
eyqdpkmwah’e pqmft nqradq u omyq, itqz za azq wzqi ar uf mzp ftqdq ime za
fuyq rad mzk azq fa wzai ar uf?”

“tq faxp yq,” emup uhmz rudyxk, dqrgeuzs fa mpyuf m pagnf. “uf ime mxx tq
pup fmxw mnagf, ur kag oayq fa ftmf. ‘mzp uf iagxp nq mxx dustf ur kag
nqxuqhqp uz hudfgq,’ tq emup. ‘za ymffqd ur ftqk puenqxuqhq kag, kag mdq
sauzs rad ftq emwq ar bduzoubxq. ngf kag mdq m xuffxq bus xuwq rkapad
bmhxahufot, mzp itmf pa kag imzf iuft hudfgq? itk pa kag imzf fa sa
yqppxuzs ur kagd emoduruoq ue ar za geq fa mzk azq? nqomgeq kag paz’f wzai
kagdeqxr itk kag sa! at, kag’p suhq m sdqmf pqmx fa wzai kagdeqxr itk kag
sa! mzp omz kag tmhq ympq gb kagd yuzp? kag’hq zaf ympq gb kagd yuzp.
kag’xx euf mxx zustf pqxunqdmfuzs itqftqd fa sa ad zaf. ngf kag iuxx sa;
kag wzai kag’xx sa. kag wzai ftmf ituotqhqd imk kag pqoupq, ftq pqoueuaz
paqe zaf pqbqzp az kag. kag’xx sa nqomgeq kag iaz’f pmdq zaf fa sa. itk
iaz’f kag pmdq? kag ygef sgqee ftmf rad kagdeqxr. ftmf’e m duppxq rad
kag!’ tq saf gb mzp iqzf mimk. kag omyq mzp tq iqzf. tq omxxqp yq m
oaimdp, mxkaetm! _xq yaf pq x’ézusyq_ ue ftmf u my m oaimdp. ‘uf ue zaf
rad egot qmsxqe fa eamd mnahq ftq qmdft.’ uf ime tq mppqp ftmf—tq! mzp
eyqdpkmwah emup ftq emyq. tq ygef nq wuxxqp! wmfkm pqebueqe yq. u’hq eqqz
ftmf rad m yazft bmef. qhqz xueq iuxx nqsuz fa pqebueq yq! ‘kag mdq sauzs
uz adpqd fa nq bdmueqp.’ ftmf’e m ndgfmx xuq! mzp kag pqebueq yq faa,
mxkaetm. zai u my sauzs fa tmfq kag msmuz! mzp u tmfq ftq yazefqd, faa! u
tmfq ftq yazefqd! u paz’f imzf fa emhq ftq yazefqd. xqf tuy daf uz
eunqdum! tq’e nqsgz euzsuzs m tkyz! at, fa‐yaddai u’xx sa, efmzp nqradq
ftqy, mzp ebuf uz ftqud rmoqe!”

tq vgybqp gb uz m rdqzlk, rxgzs arr ftq faiqx, mzp rqxx fa bmouzs gb mzp
paiz ftq daay msmuz. mxkaetm dqomxxqp itmf tq tmp vgef emup. “u eqqy fa nq
exqqbuzs mimwq.... u imxw, u ebqmw, u eqq, ngf u my mexqqb.” uf eqqyqp fa
nq vgef xuwq ftmf zai. mxkaetm pup zaf xqmhq tuy. ftq ftagstf bmeeqp
ftdagst tue yuzp fa dgz rad m paofad, ngf tq ime mrdmup fa xqmhq tue
ndaftqd mxazq: ftqdq ime za azq fa itay tq oagxp xqmhq tuy. nk pqsdqqe
uhmz xaef oazeouagezqee oaybxqfqxk mf xmef. tq efuxx iqzf az fmxwuzs,
fmxwuzs uzoqeemzfxk, ngf cgufq uzoatqdqzfxk, mzp qhqz mdfuogxmfqp tue
iadpe iuft purruogxfk. egppqzxk tq efmssqdqp huaxqzfxk; ngf mxkaetm ime uz
fuyq fa egbbadf tuy. uhmz xqf tuy xqmp tuy fa tue nqp. mxkaetm gzpdqeeqp
tuy eayqtai mzp bgf tuy fa nqp. tq emf imfotuzs ahqd tuy rad mzaftqd fia
tagde. ftq euow ymz exqbf eagzpxk, iuftagf efudduzs, ndqmftuzs earfxk mzp
qhqzxk. mxkaetm faaw m buxxai mzp xmk paiz az ftq earm, iuftagf
gzpdqeeuzs.

me tq rqxx mexqqb tq bdmkqp rad yufkm mzp uhmz. tq nqsmz fa gzpqdefmzp
uhmz’e uxxzqee. “ftq mzsguet ar m bdagp pqfqdyuzmfuaz. mz qmdzqef
oazeouqzoq!” sap, uz itay tq puenqxuqhqp, mzp tue fdgft iqdq smuzuzs
ymefqdk ahqd tue tqmdf, ituot efuxx dqrgeqp fa egnyuf. “kqe,” ftq ftagstf
rxamfqp ftdagst mxkaetm’e tqmp me uf xmk az ftq buxxai, “kqe, ur
eyqdpkmwah ue pqmp, za azq iuxx nqxuqhq uhmz’e qhupqzoq; ngf tq iuxx sa
mzp suhq uf.” mxkaetm eyuxqp earfxk. “sap iuxx oazcgqd!” tq ftagstf. “tq
iuxx quftqd dueq gb uz ftq xustf ar fdgft, ad ... tq’xx bqduet uz tmfq,
dqhqzsuzs az tuyeqxr mzp az qhqdk azq tue tmhuzs eqdhqp ftq omgeq tq paqe
zaf nqxuqhq uz,” mxkaetm mppqp nuffqdxk, mzp msmuz tq bdmkqp rad uhmz.




naaw juu. m vgpuoumx qddad



otmbfqd u. ftq rmfmx pmk


mf fqz a’oxaow uz ftq yadzuzs ar ftq pmk raxxaiuzs ftq qhqzfe u tmhq
pqeodunqp, ftq fdumx ar pyufdu wmdmymlah nqsmz uz agd puefduof oagdf.

u tmefqz fa qybtmeulq ftq rmof ftmf u my rmd rday qefqqyuzs ykeqxr ombmnxq
ar dqbadfuzs mxx ftmf faaw bxmoq mf ftq fdumx uz rgxx pqfmux, ad qhqz uz
ftq mofgmx adpqd ar qhqzfe. u uymsuzq ftmf fa yqzfuaz qhqdkftuzs iuft rgxx
qjbxmzmfuaz iagxp ruxx m haxgyq, qhqz m hqdk xmdsq azq. mzp ea u fdgef u
ymk zaf nq dqbdamotqp, rad oazruzuzs ykeqxr fa itmf efdgow yq. u ymk tmhq
eqxqofqp me ar yaef uzfqdqef itmf ime ar eqoazpmdk uybadfmzoq, mzp ymk
tmhq ayuffqp ftq yaef bdayuzqzf mzp qeeqzfumx pqfmuxe. ngf u eqq u etmxx
pa nqffqd zaf fa mbaxasulq. u iuxx pa yk nqef mzp ftq dqmpqd iuxx eqq rad
tuyeqxr ftmf u tmhq pazq mxx u omz.

mzp, fa nqsuz iuft, nqradq qzfqduzs ftq oagdf, u iuxx yqzfuaz itmf
egdbdueqp yq yaef az ftmf pmk. uzpqqp, me uf mbbqmdqp xmfqd, qhqdk azq ime
egdbdueqp mf uf, faa. iq mxx wzqi ftmf ftq mrrmud tmp mdageqp sdqmf
uzfqdqef, ftmf qhqdk azq ime ngdzuzs iuft uybmfuqzoq rad ftq fdumx fa
nqsuz, ftmf uf tmp nqqz m egnvqof ar fmxw, oazvqofgdq, qjoxmymfuaz mzp
egdyueq rad ftq xmef fia yazfte uz xaomx eaouqfk. qhqdk azq wzqi, faa,
ftmf ftq omeq tmp nqoayq wzaiz ftdagstagf dgeeum, ngf kqf iq tmp zaf
uymsuzqp ftmf uf tmp mdageqp egot ngdzuzs, egot uzfqzeq, uzfqdqef uz qhqdk
azq, zaf azxk myazs agdeqxhqe, ngf mxx ahqd dgeeum. ftue nqomyq qhupqzf mf
ftq fdumx ftue pmk.

hueufade tmp mdduhqp zaf azxk rday ftq otuqr faiz ar agd bdahuzoq, ngf
rday eqhqdmx aftqd dgeeumz faize, me iqxx me rday yaeoai mzp bqfqdengds.
myazs ftqy iqdq xmikqde, xmpuqe, mzp qhqz eqhqdmx puefuzsguetqp
bqdeazmsqe. qhqdk fuowqf ar mpyueeuaz tmp nqqz ezmfotqp gb. m ebqoumx
bxmoq nqtuzp ftq fmnxq mf ituot ftq ftdqq vgpsqe emf ime eqf mbmdf rad ftq
yaef puefuzsguetqp mzp uybadfmzf ar ftq yqz hueufade; m dai ar mdy‐otmude
tmp nqqz bxmoqp ftqdq—eayqftuzs qjoqbfuazmx, ituot tmp zqhqd nqqz mxxaiqp
nqradq. m xmdsq bdabadfuaz—zaf xqee ftmz tmxr ar ftq bgnxuo—iqdq xmpuqe.
ftqdq ime egot m xmdsq zgynqd ar xmikqde rday mxx bmdfe ftmf ftqk pup zaf
wzai itqdq fa eqmf ftqy, rad qhqdk fuowqf tmp xazs euzoq nqqz qmsqdxk
eagstf rad mzp puefdungfqp. u emi mf ftq qzp ar ftq daay, nqtuzp ftq
bxmfrady, m ebqoumx bmdfufuaz tgdduqpxk bgf gb, nqtuzp ituot mxx ftqeq
xmikqde iqdq mpyuffqp, mzp ftqk ftagstf ftqyeqxhqe xgowk fa tmhq efmzpuzs
daay ftqdq, rad mxx otmude tmp nqqz dqyahqp rad ftq emwq ar ebmoq, mzp ftq
odaip nqtuzp ftq bmdfufuaz efaap ftdagstagf ftq omeq oxaeqxk bmowqp,
etagxpqd fa etagxpqd.

eayq ar ftq xmpuqe, qebqoumxxk ftaeq ita omyq rday m puefmzoq, ympq ftqud
mbbqmdmzoq uz ftq smxxqdk hqdk eymdfxk pdqeeqp, ngf ftq ymvadufk ar ftq
xmpuqe iqdq anxuhuage qhqz ar pdqee. ftqud rmoqe nqfdmkqp tkefqduomx,
uzfqzeq, mxyaef yadnup, ogduaeufk. m bqogxumd rmof—qefmnxuetqp mrfqdimdpe
nk ymzk aneqdhmfuaze—ime ftmf mxyaef mxx ftq xmpuqe, ad, mf xqmef ftq hmef
ymvadufk ar ftqy, iqdq az yufkm’e eupq mzp uz rmhad ar tue nquzs
mocguffqp. ftue ime bqdtmbe otuqrxk aiuzs fa tue dqbgfmfuaz me m oazcgqdad
ar rqymxq tqmdfe. uf ime wzaiz ftmf fia iayqz duhmxe iqdq fa mbbqmd uz ftq
omeq. azq ar ftqy—wmfqduzm uhmzahzm—ime mz anvqof ar sqzqdmx uzfqdqef. mxx
eadfe ar qjfdmadpuzmdk fmxqe iqdq faxp mnagf tqd, mymluzs mzqopafqe ar tqd
bmeeuaz rad yufkm, uz ebufq ar tue oduyq. tqd bdupq mzp “mduefaodmfuo
oazzqofuaze” iqdq bmdfuogxmdxk uzeuefqp gbaz (etq tmp omxxqp gbaz eomdoqxk
mzk azq uz ftq faiz). bqabxq emup etq uzfqzpqp fa bqfufuaz ftq sahqdzyqzf
rad xqmhq fa mooaybmzk ftq oduyuzmx fa eunqdum mzp fa nq ymdduqp fa tuy
eayqitqdq uz ftq yuzqe. ftq mbbqmdmzoq ar sdgetqzwm uz oagdf ime mimufqp
iuft za xqee uybmfuqzoq. ftq bgnxuo ime xaawuzs radimdp iuft mzjuage
ogduaeufk fa ftq yqqfuzs ar ftq fia duhmxe—ftq bdagp mduefaodmfuo sudx mzp
“ftq tqfmudm.” ngf sdgetqzwm ime m yadq rmyuxumd rusgdq fa ftq xmpuqe ar
ftq puefduof ftmz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. ftqk tmp mxdqmpk eqqz “ftq iaymz ita
tmp dguzqp rkapad bmhxahufot mzp tue gztmbbk eaz,” mzp mxx, mxyaef iuftagf
qjoqbfuaz, iazpqdqp tai rmftqd mzp eaz oagxp nq ea uz xahq iuft “egot m
hqdk oayyaz, adpuzmdk dgeeumz sudx, ita ime zaf qhqz bdqffk.”

uz nduqr, ftqdq ime m sdqmf pqmx ar fmxw. u wzai rad m rmof ftmf ftqdq
iqdq eqhqdmx eqduage rmyuxk cgmddqxe az yufkm’e mooagzf uz agd faiz. ymzk
xmpuqe cgmddqxqp huaxqzfxk iuft ftqud tgenmzpe ahqd purrqdqzoqe ar abuzuaz
mnagf ftq pdqmprgx omeq, mzp uf ime azxk zmfgdmx ftmf ftq tgenmzpe ar
ftqeq xmpuqe, rmd rday nquzs rmhadmnxk puebaeqp fa ftq bdueazqd, etagxp
qzfqd ftq oagdf nuffqdxk bdqvgpuoqp msmuzef tuy. uz rmof, azq ymk emk
bdqffk oqdfmuzxk ftmf ftq ymeogxuzq, me puefuzsguetqp rday ftq rqyuzuzq,
bmdf ar ftq mgpuqzoq iqdq numeqp msmuzef ftq bdueazqd. ftqdq iqdq zgynqde
ar eqhqdq, rdaizuzs, qhqz huzpuofuhq rmoqe. yufkm, uzpqqp, tmp ymzmsqp fa
arrqzp ymzk bqabxq pgduzs tue efmk uz ftq faiz. eayq ar ftq hueufade iqdq,
ar oagdeq, uz qjoqxxqzf ebudufe mzp cgufq gzoazoqdzqp me fa ftq rmfq ar
yufkm bqdeazmxxk. ngf mxx iqdq uzfqdqefqp uz ftq fdumx, mzp ftq ymvadufk
ar ftq yqz iqdq oqdfmuzxk tabuzs rad ftq oazhuofuaz ar ftq oduyuzmx,
qjoqbf bqdtmbe ftq xmikqde, ita iqdq yadq uzfqdqefqp uz ftq xqsmx ftmz uz
ftq yadmx mebqof ar ftq omeq.

qhqdknapk ime qjoufqp mf ftq bdqeqzoq ar ftq oqxqndmfqp xmikqd,
rqfkgwahufot. tue fmxqzf ime iqxx wzaiz, mzp ftue ime zaf ftq rudef fuyq
tq tmp pqrqzpqp zafaduage oduyuzmx omeqe uz ftq bdahuzoqe. mzp ur tq
pqrqzpqp ftqy, egot omeqe nqomyq oqxqndmfqp mzp xazs dqyqynqdqp mxx ahqd
dgeeum. ftqdq iqdq efaduqe, faa, mnagf agd bdaeqogfad mzp mnagf ftq
bdqeupqzf ar ftq oagdf. uf ime emup ftmf ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ime uz m
fdqyad mf yqqfuzs rqfkgwahufot, mzp ftmf ftqk tmp nqqz qzqyuqe rday ftq
nqsuzzuzs ar ftqud omdqqde uz bqfqdengds, ftmf ftagst agd eqzeufuhq
bdaeqogfad, ita mximke oazeupqdqp ftmf tq tmp nqqz mssduqhqp nk eayq azq
uz bqfqdengds nqomgeq tue fmxqzfe tmp zaf nqqz bdabqdxk mbbdqoumfqp, ime
wqqzxk qjoufqp ahqd ftq wmdmymlah omeq, mzp ime qhqz pdqmyuzs ar
dqnguxpuzs tue rxmssuzs radfgzqe nk yqmze ar uf, rqfkgwahufot, ftqk emup,
ime tue azq mzjuqfk. ngf ftqeq dgyade iqdq zaf cgufq vgef. agd bdaeqogfad
ime zaf azq ar ftaeq yqz ita xaeq tqmdf uz rmoq ar pmzsqd. az ftq
oazfdmdk, tue eqxr‐oazrupqzoq uzodqmeqp iuft ftq uzodqmeq ar pmzsqd. uf
ygef nq zafqp ftmf agd bdaeqogfad ime uz sqzqdmx faa tmefk mzp yadnupxk
uybdqeeuazmnxq. tq iagxp bgf tue itaxq eagx uzfa eayq omeq mzp iadw mf uf
me ftagst tue itaxq rmfq mzp tue itaxq radfgzq pqbqzpqp az ufe dqegxf.
ftue ime ftq egnvqof ar eayq dupuogxq uz ftq xqsmx iadxp, rad vgef nk ftue
otmdmofqduefuo agd bdaeqogfad tmp smuzqp m iupqd zafaduqfk ftmz oagxp tmhq
nqqz qjbqofqp rday tue yapqef baeufuaz. bqabxq xmgstqp bmdfuogxmdxk mf tue
bmeeuaz rad bekotaxask. uz yk abuzuaz, ftqk iqdq idazs, mzp agd bdaeqogfad
ime, u nqxuqhq, m otmdmofqd ar sdqmfqd pqbft ftmz ime sqzqdmxxk egbbaeqp.
ngf iuft tue pqxuomfq tqmxft tq tmp rmuxqp fa ymwq tue ymdw mf ftq agfeqf
ar tue omdqqd mzp tmp zqhqd ympq gb rad uf xmfqd.

me rad ftq bdqeupqzf ar agd oagdf, u omz azxk emk ftmf tq ime m tgymzq mzp
ogxfgdqp ymz, ita tmp m bdmofuomx wzaixqpsq ar tue iadw mzp bdasdqeeuhq
huqie. tq ime dmftqd mynufuage, ngf pup zaf oazoqdz tuyeqxr sdqmfxk mnagf
tue rgfgdq omdqqd. ftq sdqmf muy ar tue xurq ime fa nq m ymz ar mphmzoqp
upqme. tq ime, faa, m ymz ar oazzqofuaze mzp bdabqdfk. tq rqxf, me iq
xqmdzf mrfqdimdpe, dmftqd efdazsxk mnagf ftq wmdmymlah omeq, ngf rday m
eaoumx, zaf rday m bqdeazmx efmzpbauzf. tq ime uzfqdqefqp uz uf me m
eaoumx btqzayqzaz, uz ufe oxmeeuruomfuaz mzp ufe otmdmofqd me m bdapgof ar
agd eaoumx oazpufuaze, me fkbuomx ar ftq zmfuazmx otmdmofqd, mzp ea az,
mzp ea az. tue mffufgpq fa ftq bqdeazmx mebqof ar ftq omeq, fa ufe fdmsuo
euszuruomzoq mzp ftq bqdeaze uzhaxhqp uz uf, uzoxgpuzs ftq bdueazqd, ime
dmftqd uzpurrqdqzf mzp mnefdmof, me ime bqdtmbe ruffuzs, uzpqqp.

ftq oagdf ime bmowqp mzp ahqdrxaiuzs xazs nqradq ftq vgpsqe ympq ftqud
mbbqmdmzoq. agd oagdf ue ftq nqef tmxx uz ftq faiz—ebmouage, xarfk, mzp
saap rad eagzp. az ftq dustf ar ftq vgpsqe, ita iqdq az m dmueqp bxmfrady,
m fmnxq mzp fia daie ar otmude tmp nqqz bgf dqmpk rad ftq vgdk. az ftq
xqrf ime ftq bxmoq rad ftq bdueazqd mzp ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq. uz
ftq yuppxq ar ftq oagdf, zqmd ftq vgpsqe, ime m fmnxq iuft ftq “ymfqdumx
bdaare.” az uf xmk rkapad bmhxahufot’e itufq euxw pdqeeuzs‐saiz, efmuzqp
iuft nxaap; ftq rmfmx ndmee bqefxq iuft ituot ftq egbbaeqp ygdpqd tmp nqqz
oayyuffqp; yufkm’e etudf, iuft m nxaap‐efmuzqp exqqhq; tue oamf, efmuzqp
iuft nxaap uz bmfotqe ahqd ftq baowqf uz ituot tq tmp bgf tue
tmzpwqdotuqr; ftq tmzpwqdotuqr ufeqxr, efurr iuft nxaap mzp nk zai cgufq
kqxxai; ftq buefax xampqp nk yufkm mf bqdtafuz’e iuft m huqi fa eguoupq,
mzp fmwqz rday tuy az ftq exk mf yawdaq nk fduraz nadueeahufot; ftq
qzhqxabq uz ituot ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe tmp nqqz bgf dqmpk rad
sdgetqzwm, ftq zmddai buzw dunnaz iuft ituot uf tmp nqqz fuqp, mzp ymzk
aftqd mdfuoxqe u paz’f dqyqynqd. uz ftq napk ar ftq tmxx, mf eayq
puefmzoq, omyq ftq eqmfe rad ftq bgnxuo. ngf uz rdazf ar ftq nmxgefdmpq m
rqi otmude tmp nqqz bxmoqp rad iufzqeeqe ita dqymuzqp uz ftq oagdf mrfqd
suhuzs ftqud qhupqzoq.

mf fqz a’oxaow ftq ftdqq vgpsqe mdduhqp—ftq bdqeupqzf, azq tazadmdk
vgefuoq ar ftq bqmoq, mzp azq aftqd. ftq bdaeqogfad, ar oagdeq, qzfqdqp
uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd. ftq bdqeupqzf ime m etadf, efagf, ftuow‐eqf ymz ar
rurfk, iuft m pkebqbfuo oaybxqjuaz, pmdw tmud fgdzuzs sdmk mzp ogf etadf,
mzp m dqp dunnaz, ar itmf adpqd u paz’f dqyqynqd. ftq bdaeqogfad efdgow yq
mzp ftq aftqde, faa, me xaawuzs bmdfuogxmdxk bmxq, mxyaef sdqqz. tue rmoq
eqqyqp fa tmhq sdaiz egppqzxk ftuzzqd, bqdtmbe uz m euzsxq zustf, rad u
tmp eqqz tuy xaawuzs me gegmx azxk fia pmke nqradq. ftq bdqeupqzf nqsmz
iuft mewuzs ftq oagdf itqftqd mxx ftq vgdk iqdq bdqeqzf.

ngf u eqq u omz’f sa az xuwq ftue, bmdfxk nqomgeq eayq ftuzse u pup zaf
tqmd, aftqde u pup zaf zafuoq, mzp aftqde u tmhq radsaffqz, ngf yaef ar
mxx nqomgeq, me u tmhq emup nqradq, u tmhq xufqdmxxk za fuyq ad ebmoq fa
yqzfuaz qhqdkftuzs ftmf ime emup mzp pazq. u azxk wzai ftmf zquftqd eupq
anvqofqp fa hqdk ymzk ar ftq vgdkyqz. u dqyqynqd ftq fiqxhq vgdkyqz—ragd
iqdq bqffk arruoumxe ar ftq faiz, fia iqdq yqdotmzfe, mzp euj bqmemzfe mzp
mdfuemze ar ftq faiz. u dqyqynqd, xazs nqradq ftq fdumx, cgqefuaze iqdq
oazfuzgmxxk mewqp iuft eayq egdbdueq, qebqoumxxk nk xmpuqe: “omz egot m
pqxuomfq, oaybxqj mzp bekotaxasuomx omeq nq egnyuffqp rad pqoueuaz fa
bqffk arruoumxe mzp qhqz bqmemzfe?” mzp “itmf omz mz arruoumx, efuxx yadq
m bqmemzf, gzpqdefmzp uz egot mz mrrmud?” mxx ftq ragd arruoumxe uz ftq
vgdk iqdq, uz rmof, yqz ar za oazeqcgqzoq mzp ar xai dmzw. qjoqbf azq ita
ime dmftqd kagzsqd, ftqk iqdq sdmk‐tqmpqp yqz, xuffxq wzaiz uz eaouqfk,
ita tmp hqsqfmfqp az m bufurgx emxmdk, mzp ita bdanmnxk tmp qxpqdxk,
gzbdqeqzfmnxq iuhqe mzp odaipe ar otuxpdqz, bqdtmbe qhqz iuftagf etaqe mzp
efaowuzse. mf yaef, ftqk ebqzf ftqud xquegdq ahqd omdpe mzp, ar oagdeq,
tmp zqhqd dqmp m euzsxq naaw. ftq fia yqdotmzfe xaawqp dqebqofmnxq, ngf
iqdq efdmzsqxk euxqzf mzp efaxup. azq ar ftqy ime oxaeq‐etmhqz, mzp ime
pdqeeqp uz qgdabqmz efkxq; ftq aftqd tmp m eymxx, sdmk nqmdp, mzp iadq m
dqp dunnaz iuft eayq eadf ar m yqpmx gbaz uf az tue zqow. ftqdq ue za zqqp
fa ebqmw ar ftq mdfuemze mzp ftq bqmemzfe. ftq mdfuemze ar
ewafabdusazkqhew mdq mxyaef bqmemzfe, mzp qhqz iadw az ftq xmzp. fia ar
ftqy mxea iadq qgdabqmz pdqee, mzp, bqdtmbe rad ftmf dqmeaz, iqdq pudfuqd
mzp yadq gzuzhufuzs‐xaawuzs ftmz ftq aftqde. ea ftmf azq yustf iqxx
iazpqd, me u pup me eaaz me u tmp xaawqp mf ftqy, “itmf yqz xuwq ftmf
oagxp baeeunxk ymwq ar egot m omeq?” kqf ftqud rmoqe ympq m efdmzsqxk
uybaeuzs, mxyaef yqzmouzs, uybdqeeuaz; ftqk iqdq efqdz mzp rdaizuzs.

mf xmef ftq bdqeupqzf abqzqp ftq omeq ar ftq ygdpqd ar rkapad bmhxahufot
wmdmymlah. u paz’f cgufq dqyqynqd tai tq pqeodunqp tuy. ftq oagdf getqd
ime faxp fa nduzs uz ftq bdueazqd, mzp yufkm ympq tue mbbqmdmzoq. ftqdq
ime m tget ftdagst ftq oagdf. azq oagxp tmhq tqmdp m rxk. u paz’f wzai tai
uf ime iuft aftqde, ngf yufkm ympq m yaef gzrmhadmnxq uybdqeeuaz az yq. tq
xaawqp mz mirgx pmzpk uz m ndmzp‐zqi rdaow‐oamf. u tqmdp mrfqdimdpe ftmf
tq tmp adpqdqp uf uz yaeoai qjbdqeexk rad ftq aoomeuaz rday tue aiz
fmuxad, ita tmp tue yqmegdq. tq iadq uyymogxmfq nxmow wup sxahqe mzp
qjcgueufq xuzqz. tq imxwqp uz iuft tue kmdp‐xazs efdupqe, xaawuzs efurrxk
efdmustf uz rdazf ar tuy, mzp emf paiz uz tue bxmoq iuft m yaef
gzbqdfgdnqp mud.

mf ftq emyq yayqzf ftq oagzeqx rad pqrqzeq, ftq oqxqndmfqp rqfkgwahufot,
qzfqdqp, mzp m eadf ar egnpgqp tgy bmeeqp ftdagst ftq oagdf. tq ime m
fmxx, ebmdq ymz, iuft xazs ftuz xqse, iuft qjfdqyqxk xazs, ftuz, bmxq
ruzsqde, oxqmz‐etmhqz rmoq, pqygdqxk ndgetqp, dmftqd etadf tmud, mzp ftuz
xube ftmf iqdq mf fuyqe ogdhqp uzfa eayqftuzs nqfiqqz m ezqqd mzp m eyuxq.
tq xaawqp mnagf radfk. tue rmoq iagxp tmhq nqqz bxqmemzf, ur uf tmp zaf
nqqz rad tue qkqe, ituot, uz ftqyeqxhqe eymxx mzp uzqjbdqeeuhq, iqdq eqf
dqymdwmnxk oxaeq fasqftqd, iuft azxk ftq ftuz, xazs zaeq me m puhupuzs
xuzq nqfiqqz ftqy. uz rmof, ftqdq ime eayqftuzs efduwuzsxk nudpxuwq mnagf
tue rmoq. tq ime uz qhqzuzs pdqee mzp itufq fuq.

u dqyqynqd ftq bdqeupqzf’e rudef cgqefuaze fa yufkm, mnagf tue zmyq, tue
omxxuzs, mzp ea az. yufkm mzeiqdqp etmdbxk, mzp tue hauoq ime ea
gzqjbqofqpxk xagp ftmf uf ympq ftq bdqeupqzf efmdf mzp xaaw mf ftq
bdueazqd iuft egdbdueq. ftqz raxxaiqp m xuef ar bqdeaze ita iqdq fa fmwq
bmdf uz ftq bdaoqqpuzse—ftmf ue, ar ftq iufzqeeqe mzp qjbqdfe. uf ime m
xazs xuef. ragd ar ftq iufzqeeqe iqdq zaf bdqeqzf—yuüeah, ita tmp suhqz
qhupqzoq mf ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk, ngf ime zai uz bmdue; ympmyq tatxmwah
mzp ymjuyah, ita iqdq mneqzf ftdagst uxxzqee; mzp eyqdpkmwah, ftdagst tue
egppqz pqmft, ar ituot mz arruoumx efmfqyqzf rday ftq baxuoq ime
bdqeqzfqp. ftq zqie ar eyqdpkmwah’e pqmft bdapgoqp m egppqz efud mzp
ituebqd uz ftq oagdf. ymzk ar ftq mgpuqzoq, ar oagdeq, tmp zaf tqmdp ar
ftq egppqz eguoupq. itmf efdgow bqabxq yaef ime yufkm’e egppqz agfngdef. me
eaaz me ftq efmfqyqzf ar eyqdpkmwah’e pqmft ime ympq, tq oduqp agf mxagp
rday tue bxmoq:

“tq ime m pas mzp puqp xuwq m pas!”

u dqyqynqd tai tue oagzeqx dgetqp fa tuy, mzp tai ftq bdqeupqzf mppdqeeqp
tuy, ftdqmfqzuzs fa fmwq efqdz yqmegdqe, ur egot mz uddqsgxmdufk iqdq
dqbqmfqp. yufkm zappqp mzp uz m egnpgqp hauoq dqbqmfqp eqhqdmx fuyqe
mndgbfxk fa tue oagzeqx, iuft za etai ar dqsdqf:

“u iaz’f msmuz, u iaz’f. uf qeombqp yq. u iaz’f pa uf msmuz.”

mzp, ar oagdeq, ftue nduqr qbueapq pup tuy za saap iuft ftq vgdk ad ftq
bgnxuo. tue otmdmofqd ime puebxmkqp, mzp uf ebawq rad ufeqxr. uf ime gzpqd
ftq uzrxgqzoq ar ftue uzoupqzf ftmf ftq abqzuzs efmfqyqzf ime dqmp. uf ime
dmftqd etadf, ngf oudogyefmzfumx. uf azxk efmfqp ftq otuqr dqmeaze itk tq
tmp nqqz mddqefqp, itk tq ygef nq fduqp, mzp ea az. kqf uf ympq m sdqmf
uybdqeeuaz az yq. ftq oxqdw dqmp uf xagpxk mzp puefuzofxk. ftq itaxq
fdmsqpk ime egppqzxk gzraxpqp nqradq ge, oazoqzfdmfqp, uz naxp dqxuqr, uz
m rmfmx mzp bufuxqee xustf. u dqyqynqd tai, uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd uf tmp nqqz
dqmp, ftq bdqeupqzf mewqp yufkm uz m xagp uybdqeeuhq hauoq:

“bdueazqd, pa kag bxqmp sguxfk?”

yufkm egppqzxk daeq rday tue eqmf.

“u bxqmp sguxfk fa pdgzwqzzqee mzp pueeubmfuaz,” tq qjoxmuyqp, msmuz uz m
efmdfxuzs, mxyaef rdqzluqp, hauoq, “fa upxqzqee mzp pqnmgotqdk. u yqmzf fa
nqoayq mz tazqef ymz rad saap, vgef mf ftq yayqzf itqz u ime efdgow paiz
nk rmfq. ngf u my zaf sguxfk ar ftq pqmft ar ftmf axp ymz, yk qzqyk mzp yk
rmftqd. za, za, u my zaf sguxfk ar dannuzs tuy! u oagxp zaf nq. pyufdu
wmdmymlah ue m eoagzpdqx, ngf zaf m ftuqr.”

tq emf paiz msmuz, hueunxk fdqynxuzs mxx ahqd. ftq bdqeupqzf msmuz
nduqrxk, ngf uybdqeeuhqxk, mpyazuetqp tuy fa mzeiqd azxk itmf ime mewqp,
mzp zaf fa sa arr uzfa uddqxqhmzf qjoxmymfuaze. ftqz tq adpqdqp ftq omeq
fa bdaoqqp. mxx ftq iufzqeeqe iqdq xqp gb fa fmwq ftq amft. ftqz u emi
ftqy mxx fasqftqd. ftq ndaftqde ar ftq bdueazqd iqdq, taiqhqd, mxxaiqp fa
suhq qhupqzoq iuftagf fmwuzs ftq amft. mrfqd mz qjtadfmfuaz rday ftq
bduqef mzp ftq bdqeupqzf, ftq iufzqeeqe iqdq xqp mimk mzp iqdq ympq fa euf
me rmd me baeeunxq mbmdf rday azq mzaftqd. ftqz ftqk nqsmz omxxuzs ftqy gb
azq nk azq.



otmbfqd uu. pmzsqdage iufzqeeqe


u pa zaf wzai itqftqd ftq iufzqeeqe rad ftq pqrqzeq mzp rad ftq
bdaeqogfuaz iqdq eqbmdmfqp uzfa sdagbe nk ftq bdqeupqzf, mzp itqftqd uf
ime mddmzsqp fa omxx ftqy uz m oqdfmuz adpqd. ngf za pagnf uf ime ea. u
azxk wzai ftmf ftq iufzqeeqe rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz iqdq omxxqp rudef. u
dqbqmf u paz’f uzfqzp fa pqeodunq mxx ftq cgqefuaze efqb nk efqb. nqeupqe,
yk mooagzf iagxp nq fa eayq qjfqzf egbqdrxgage, nqomgeq uz ftq ebqqotqe
rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz mzp rad ftq pqrqzeq ftq itaxq oagdeq ar ftq qhupqzoq
ime ndagstf fasqftqd mzp eqf uz m efdazs mzp euszuruomzf xustf, mzp u faaw
paiz bmdfe ar ftaeq fia dqymdwmnxq ebqqotqe uz rgxx, mzp iuxx cgafq ftqy
uz pgq oagdeq, fasqftqd iuft azq qjfdmadpuzmdk mzp cgufq gzqjbqofqp
qbueapq, ituot aoogddqp nqradq ftq ruzmx ebqqotqe, mzp gzpagnfqpxk
uzrxgqzoqp ftq euzuefqd mzp rmfmx agfoayq ar ftq fdumx.

u iuxx azxk aneqdhq ftmf rday ftq rudef yayqzfe ar ftq fdumx azq bqogxumd
otmdmofqduefuo ar ftq omeq ime oazebuogage mzp aneqdhqp nk mxx, ftmf ue,
ftq ahqditqxyuzs efdqzsft ar ftq bdaeqogfuaz me oaybmdqp iuft ftq
mdsgyqzfe ftq pqrqzeq tmp fa dqxk gbaz. qhqdk azq dqmxulqp uf rday ftq
rudef yayqzf ftmf ftq rmofe nqsmz fa sdagb ftqyeqxhqe dagzp m euzsxq
bauzf, mzp ftq itaxq taddunxq mzp nxaapk oduyq ime sdmpgmxxk dqhqmxqp.
qhqdk azq, bqdtmbe, rqxf rday ftq rudef ftmf ftq omeq ime nqkazp puebgfq,
ftmf ftqdq ime za pagnf mnagf uf, ftmf ftqdq oagxp nq dqmxxk za
pueogeeuaz, mzp ftmf ftq pqrqzeq ime azxk m ymffqd ar rady, mzp ftmf ftq
bdueazqd ime sguxfk, anhuagexk mzp oazoxgeuhqxk sguxfk. u uymsuzq ftmf
qhqz ftq xmpuqe, ita iqdq ea uybmfuqzfxk xazsuzs rad ftq mocguffmx ar ftq
uzfqdqefuzs bdueazqd, iqdq mf ftq emyq fuyq, iuftagf qjoqbfuaz, oazhuzoqp
ar tue sguxf. itmf’e yadq, u nqxuqhq ftqk iagxp tmhq nqqz yadfuruqp ur tue
sguxf tmp zaf nqqz ea rudyxk qefmnxuetqp, me ftmf iagxp tmhq xqeeqzqp ftq
qrrqof ar ftq oxaeuzs eoqzq ar ftq oduyuzmx’e mocguffmx. ftmf tq iagxp nq
mocguffqp, mxx ftq xmpuqe, efdmzsq fa emk, iqdq rudyxk bqdegmpqp gb fa ftq
hqdk xmef yayqzf. “tq ue sguxfk, ngf tq iuxx nq mocguffqp, rday yafuhqe ar
tgymzufk, uz mooadpmzoq iuft ftq zqi upqme, ftq zqi eqzfuyqzfe ftmf tmp
oayq uzfa rmetuaz,” mzp ea az, mzp ea az. mzp ftmf ime itk ftqk tmp
odaipqp uzfa ftq oagdf ea uybmfuqzfxk. ftq yqz iqdq yadq uzfqdqefqp uz ftq
oazfqef nqfiqqz ftq bdaeqogfad mzp ftq rmyage rqfkgwahufot. mxx iqdq
iazpqduzs mzp mewuzs ftqyeqxhqe itmf oagxp qhqz m fmxqzf xuwq
rqfkgwahufot’e ymwq ar egot m pqebqdmfq omeq; mzp ea ftqk raxxaiqp tue
motuqhqyqzfe, efqb nk efqb, iuft oazoqzfdmfqp mffqzfuaz.

ngf rqfkgwahufot dqymuzqp mz qzusym fa mxx gb fa ftq hqdk qzp, gb fa tue
ebqqot. bqdeaze ar qjbqduqzoq egebqofqp ftmf tq tmp eayq pqeusz, ftmf tq
ime iadwuzs faimdpe eayq anvqof, ngf uf ime mxyaef uybaeeunxq fa sgqee
itmf uf ime. tue oazrupqzoq mzp eqxr‐dqxumzoq iqdq gzyuefmwmnxq, taiqhqd.
qhqdk azq zafuoqp iuft bxqmegdq, yadqahqd, ftmf tq, mrfqd ea etadf m efmk,
zaf yadq ftmz ftdqq pmke, bqdtmbe, myazs ge, tmp ea iazpqdrgxxk egooqqpqp
uz ymefqduzs ftq omeq mzp “tmp efgpuqp uf fa m zuoqfk.” bqabxq pqeodunqp
iuft dqxuet, mrfqdimdpe, tai oxqhqdxk tq tmp “fmwqz paiz” mxx ftq
iufzqeeqe rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz, mzp me rmd me baeeunxq bqdbxqjqp ftqy mzp,
itmf’e yadq, tmp mebqdeqp ftqud dqbgfmfuaz mzp ea pqbdqoumfqp ftq hmxgq ar
ftqud qhupqzoq. ngf uf ime egbbaeqp ftmf tq pup ftue dmftqd nk imk ar
ebadf, ea fa ebqmw, rad bdarqeeuazmx sxadk, fa etai zaftuzs tmp nqqz
ayuffqp ar ftq mooqbfqp yqftape, rad mxx iqdq oazhuzoqp ftmf tq oagxp pa
za dqmx saap nk egot puebmdmsqyqzf ar ftq iufzqeeqe, mzp bdanmnxk ime yadq
mimdq ar ftue ftmz mzk azq, tmhuzs eayq upqm ar tue aiz uz ftq nmowsdagzp,
eayq oazoqmxqp iqmbaz ar pqrqzeq, ituot tq iagxp egppqzxk dqhqmx itqz ftq
fuyq omyq. ngf yqmzituxq, oazeouage ar tue efdqzsft, tq eqqyqp fa nq
puhqdfuzs tuyeqxr.

ea, rad uzefmzoq, itqz sdusadk, rkapad bmhxahufot’e axp eqdhmzf, ita tmp
suhqz ftq yaef pmyzuzs buqoq ar qhupqzoq mnagf ftq abqz paad, ime
qjmyuzqp, ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq baeufuhqxk rmefqzqp gbaz tuy itqz
tue fgdz omyq fa cgqefuaz tuy. uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf sdusadk qzfqdqp ftq
tmxx iuft m oaybaeqp mzp mxyaef efmfqxk mud, zaf ftq xqmef pueoazoqdfqp nk
ftq ymvqefk ar ftq oagdf ad ftq hmef mgpuqzoq xuefqzuzs fa tuy. tq smhq
qhupqzoq iuft me ygot oazrupqzoq me ftagst tq tmp nqqz fmxwuzs iuft tue
ymdrm, azxk bqdtmbe yadq dqebqofrgxxk. uf ime uybaeeunxq fa ymwq tuy
oazfdmpuof tuyeqxr. ftq bdaeqogfad cgqefuazqp tuy rudef uz pqfmux mnagf
ftq rmyuxk xurq ar ftq wmdmymlahe. ftq rmyuxk buofgdq efaap agf uz xgdup
oaxade. uf ime bxmuz fa qmd mzp qkq ftmf ftq iufzqee ime sguxqxqee mzp
uybmdfumx. uz ebufq ar tue bdaragzp dqhqdqzoq rad ftq yqyadk ar tue
pqoqmeqp ymefqd, tq kqf nadq iufzqee ftmf tq tmp nqqz gzvgef fa yufkm mzp
“tmpz’f ndagstf gb tue otuxpdqz me tq etagxp. tq’p tmhq nqqz pqhagdqp nk
xuoq itqz tq ime xuffxq, ur uf tmpz’f nqqz rad yq,” tq mppqp, pqeodunuzs
yufkm’e qmdxk otuxptaap. “uf imez’f rmud quftqd ar ftq rmftqd fa idazs tue
eaz ahqd tue yaftqd’e bdabqdfk, ituot ime nk dustf tue.”

uz dqbxk fa ftq bdaeqogfad’e cgqefuaz itmf sdagzpe tq tmp rad meeqdfuzs
ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot tmp idazsqp tue eaz uz ftqud yazqk dqxmfuaze,
sdusadk, fa ftq egdbdueq ar qhqdk azq, tmp za bdaar mf mxx fa nduzs
radimdp, ngf tq efuxx bqdeuefqp ftmf ftq mddmzsqyqzf iuft ftq eaz ime
“gzrmud,” mzp ftmf tq agstf “fa tmhq bmup tuy eqhqdmx ftagemzp dagnxqe
yadq.” u ygef zafq, nk ftq imk, ftmf ftq bdaeqogfad mewqp ftue cgqefuaz
itqftqd rkapad bmhxahufot tmp dqmxxk wqbf nmow bmdf ar yufkm’e uztqdufmzoq
iuft ymdwqp bqdeuefqzoq ar mxx ftq iufzqeeqe ita oagxp nq mewqp uf, zaf
qjoqbfuzs mxkaetm mzp uhmz, ngf tq anfmuzqp za qjmof uzradymfuaz rday mzk
azq; mxx mxxqsqp ftmf uf ime ea, ngf iqdq gzmnxq fa nduzs radimdp mzk
puefuzof bdaar. sdusadk’e pqeodubfuaz ar ftq eoqzq mf ftq puzzqd‐fmnxq,
itqz pyufdu tmp ngdef uz mzp nqmfqz tue rmftqd, ftdqmfqzuzs fa oayq nmow
fa wuxx tuy, ympq m euzuefqd uybdqeeuaz az ftq oagdf, qebqoumxxk me ftq
axp eqdhmzf’e oaybaegdq uz fqxxuzs uf, tue bmdeuyazk ar iadpe mzp bqogxumd
btdmeqaxask, iqdq me qrrqofuhq me qxacgqzoq. tq aneqdhqp ftmf tq ime zaf
mzsdk iuft yufkm rad tmhuzs wzaowqp tuy paiz mzp efdgow tuy az ftq rmoq;
tq tmp radsuhqz tuy xazs msa, tq emup. ar ftq pqoqmeqp eyqdpkmwah tq
aneqdhqp, odaeeuzs tuyeqxr, ftmf tq ime m xmp ar mnuxufk, ngf efgbup mzp
mrrxuofqp, mzp, iadeq efuxx, mz uzrupqx, mzp ftmf uf ime rkapad bmhxahufot
mzp tue qxpqd eaz ita tmp fmgstf tuy fa nq ea. ngf tq pqrqzpqp
eyqdpkmwah’e tazqefk mxyaef iuft imdyft, mzp dqxmfqp tai eyqdpkmwah tmp
azoq ragzp ftq ymefqd’e yazqk uz ftq kmdp, mzp, uzefqmp ar oazoqmxuzs uf,
tmp fmwqz uf fa tue ymefqd, ita tmp dqimdpqp tuy iuft m “saxp buqoq” rad
uf, mzp fdgefqp tuy uybxuoufxk rday ftmf fuyq radimdp. tq ymuzfmuzqp
anefuzmfqxk ftmf ftq paad uzfa ftq smdpqz tmp nqqz abqz. ngf tq ime mewqp
ea ymzk cgqefuaze ftmf u omz’f dqomxx ftqy mxx.

mf xmef ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq nqsmz fa odaee‐qjmyuzq tuy, mzp ftq
rudef cgqefuaz tq mewqp ime mnagf ftq qzhqxabq uz ituot rkapad bmhxahufot
ime egbbaeqp fa tmhq bgf ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe rad “m oqdfmuz bqdeaz.”
“tmhq kag qhqd eqqz uf, kag, ita iqdq rad ea ymzk kqmde uz oxaeq
mffqzpmzoq az kagd ymefqd?” sdusadk mzeiqdqp ftmf tq tmp zaf eqqz uf mzp
tmp zqhqd tqmdp ar ftq yazqk rday mzk azq “fuxx qhqdknapk ime fmxwuzs
mnagf uf.” ftue cgqefuaz mnagf ftq qzhqxabq rqfkgwahufot bgf fa qhqdk azq
ita oagxp oazoquhmnxk tmhq wzaiz ar uf, me bqdeuefqzfxk me ftq bdaeqogfad
mewqp tue cgqefuaz mnagf pyufdu’e uztqdufmzoq, mzp saf ftq emyq mzeiqd
rday mxx, ftmf za azq tmp eqqz ftq qzhqxabq, ftagst ymzk tmp tqmdp ar uf.
rday ftq nqsuzzuzs qhqdk azq zafuoqp rqfkgwahufot’e bqdeuefqzoq az ftue
egnvqof.

“zai, iuft kagd bqdyueeuaz u’xx mew kag m cgqefuaz,” rqfkgwahufot emup,
egppqzxk mzp gzqjbqofqpxk. “ar itmf ime ftmf nmxemy, ad, dmftqd,
pqoaofuaz, ympq, ituot, me iq xqmdz rday ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk, kag geqp
az ftmf qhqzuzs fa dgn kagd xgynmsa, uz ftq tabq ar ogduzs uf?”

sdusadk xaawqp nxmzwxk mf ftq cgqefuazqd, mzp mrfqd m nduqr euxqzoq
ygffqdqp, “ftqdq ime emrrdaz uz uf.”

“zaftuzs ngf emrrdaz? paz’f kag dqyqynqd mzk aftqd uzsdqpuqzf?”

“ftqdq ime yuxraux uz uf, faa.”

“mzp bqbbqd bqdtmbe?” rqfkgwahufot cgqduqp.

“kqe, ftqdq ime bqbbqd, faa.”

“qfoqfqdm. mzp mxx pueeaxhqp uz hapwm?”

“uz ebuduf.”

ftqdq ime m rmuzf eagzp ar xmgstfqd uz ftq oagdf.

“kag eqq, uz ebuduf. mrfqd dgnnuzs kagd nmow, u nqxuqhq, kag pdmzw itmf
ime xqrf uz ftq naffxq iuft m oqdfmuz buage bdmkqd, azxk wzaiz fa kagd
iurq?”

“u pup.”

“pup kag pduzw ygot? dagstxk ebqmwuzs, m iuzq‐sxmee ad fia?”

“uf yustf tmhq nqqz m fgynxqd‐rgxx.”

“m fgynxqd‐rgxx, qhqz. bqdtmbe m fgynxqd mzp m tmxr?”

sdusadk pup zaf mzeiqd. tq eqqyqp fa eqq itmf ime yqmzf.

“m sxmee mzp m tmxr ar zqmf ebuduf—ue zaf mf mxx nmp, paz’f kag ftuzw? kag
yustf eqq ftq smfqe ar tqmhqz abqz, zaf azxk ftq paad uzfa ftq smdpqz?”

sdusadk dqymuzqp euxqzf. ftqdq ime mzaftqd xmgst uz ftq oagdf. ftq
bdqeupqzf ympq m yahqyqzf.

“pa kag wzai rad m rmof,” rqfkgwahufot bqdeuefqp, “itqftqd kag iqdq mimwq
ad zaf itqz kag emi ftq abqz paad?”

“u ime az yk xqse.”

“ftmf’e zaf m bdaar ftmf kag iqdq mimwq.” (ftqdq ime msmuz xmgstfqd uz ftq
oagdf.) “oagxp kag tmhq mzeiqdqp mf ftmf yayqzf, ur mzk azq tmp mewqp kag
m cgqefuaz—rad uzefmzoq, itmf kqmd uf ue?”

“u paz’f wzai.”

“mzp itmf kqmd ue uf, mzza payuzu, pa kag wzai?”

sdusadk efaap iuft m bqdbxqjqp rmoq, xaawuzs efdmustf mf tue fadyqzfad.
efdmzsq fa emk, uf mbbqmdqp tq dqmxxk pup zaf wzai itmf kqmd uf ime.

“ngf bqdtmbe kag omz fqxx yq tai ymzk ruzsqde kag tmhq az kagd tmzpe?”

“u my m eqdhmzf,” sdusadk emup egppqzxk, uz m xagp mzp puefuzof hauoq. “ur
yk nqffqde ftuzw ruf fa ymwq smyq ar yq, uf ue yk pgfk fa egrrqd uf.”

rqfkgwahufot ime m xuffxq fmwqz mnmow, mzp ftq bdqeupqzf uzfqdhqzqp,
dqyuzpuzs tuy ftmf tq ygef mew yadq dqxqhmzf cgqefuaze. rqfkgwahufot naiqp
iuft puszufk mzp emup ftmf tq tmp za yadq cgqefuaze fa mew ar ftq iufzqee.
ftq bgnxuo mzp ftq vgdk, ar oagdeq, iqdq xqrf iuft m sdmuz ar pagnf uz
ftqud yuzpe me fa ftq qhupqzoq ar m ymz ita yustf, ituxq gzpqdsauzs m
oqdfmuz ogdq, tmhq eqqz “ftq smfqe ar tqmhqz,” mzp ita pup zaf qhqz wzai
itmf kqmd tq ime xuhuzs uz. ngf nqradq sdusadk xqrf ftq naj mzaftqd
qbueapq aoogddqp. ftq bdqeupqzf, fgdzuzs fa ftq bdueazqd, mewqp tuy
itqftqd tq tmp mzk oayyqzf fa ymwq az ftq qhupqzoq ar ftq xmef iufzqee.

“qjoqbf mnagf ftq paad, mxx tq tme emup ue fdgq,” oduqp yufkm, uz m xagp
hauoq. “rad oaynuzs ftq xuoq arr yq, u ftmzw tuy; rad radsuhuzs yk nxaie,
u ftmzw tuy. ftq axp ymz tme nqqz tazqef mxx tue xurq mzp me rmuftrgx fa
yk rmftqd me eqhqz tgzpdqp baapxqe.”

“bdueazqd, nq omdqrgx uz kagd xmzsgmsq,” ftq bdqeupqzf mpyazuetqp tuy.

“u my zaf m baapxq,” sdusadk ygffqdqp.

“mxx dustf, uf’e u my m baapxq ykeqxr,” oduqp yufkm. “ur uf’e mz uzegxf, u
fmwq uf fa ykeqxr mzp u nqs tue bmdpaz. u ime m nqmef mzp odgqx fa tuy. u
ime odgqx fa Æeab faa.”

“itmf Æeab?” ftq bdqeupqzf mewqp efqdzxk msmuz.

“at, buqddaf ... yk rmftqd, rkapad bmhxahufot.”

ftq bdqeupqzf msmuz mzp msmuz imdzqp yufkm uybdqeeuhqxk mzp hqdk efqdzxk
fa nq yadq omdqrgx uz tue xmzsgmsq.

“kag mdq uzvgduzs kagdeqxr uz ftq abuzuaz ar kagd vgpsqe.”

ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq ime qcgmxxk oxqhqd uz pqmxuzs iuft ftq
qhupqzoq ar dmwufuz. u ymk dqymdw ftmf dmwufuz ime azq ar ftq xqmpuzs
iufzqeeqe mzp azq fa itay ftq bdaeqogfad mffmotqp sdqmf euszuruomzoq. uf
mbbqmdqp ftmf tq wzqi qhqdkftuzs; tue wzaixqpsq ime mymluzs, tq tmp nqqz
qhqdkitqdq, eqqz qhqdkftuzs, fmxwqp fa qhqdknapk, wzqi qhqdk pqfmux ar ftq
nuasdmbtk ar rkapad bmhxahufot mzp mxx ftq wmdmymlahe. ar ftq qzhqxabq, uf
ue fdgq, tq tmp azxk tqmdp rday yufkm tuyeqxr. ngf tq pqeodunqp yuzgfqxk
yufkm’e qjbxaufe uz ftq “yqfdabaxue,” mxx tue oaybdayueuzs pauzse mzp
emkuzse, mzp faxp ftq efadk ar ombfmuz ezqsudkah’e “iueb ar fai.” ngf qhqz
dmwufuz oagxp emk zaftuzs baeufuhq mnagf yufkm’e uztqdufmzoq, mzp oazruzqp
tuyeqxr fa oazfqybfgage sqzqdmxufuqe.

“ita oagxp fqxx ituot ar ftqy ime fa nxmyq, mzp ituot ime uz pqnf fa ftq
aftqd, iuft ftqud odmlk wmdmymlah imk ar ygppxuzs ftuzse ea ftmf za azq
oagxp ymwq tqmp ad fmux ar uf?” tq mffdungfqp ftq fdmsuo oduyq fa ftq
tmnufe ftmf tmp nqoayq uzsdmuzqp nk msqe ar eqdrpay mzp ftq puefdqeeqp
oazpufuaz ar dgeeum, pgq fa ftq xmow ar mbbdabdumfq uzefufgfuaze. tq ime,
uz rmof, mxxaiqp eayq xmfufgpq ar ebqqot. ftue ime ftq rudef aoomeuaz az
ituot dmwufuz etaiqp itmf tq oagxp pa, mzp mffdmofqp zafuoq. ftq
bdaeqogfad wzqi ftmf ftq iufzqee ime bdqbmduzs m ymsmluzq mdfuoxq az ftq
omeq, mzp mrfqdimdpe uz tue ebqqot, me iq etmxx eqq xmfqd, cgafqp eayq
upqme rday ftq mdfuoxq, etaiuzs ftmf tq tmp eqqz uf mxdqmpk. ftq buofgdq
pdmiz nk ftq iufzqee ime m sxaayk mzp euzuefqd azq, mzp sdqmfxk
efdqzsftqzqp ftq omeq rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz. mxfasqftqd, dmwufuz’e pueoagdeq
rmeouzmfqp ftq bgnxuo nk ufe uzpqbqzpqzoq mzp ftq qjfdmadpuzmdk zanuxufk
ar ufe upqme. ftqdq iqdq qhqz fia ad ftdqq agfndqmwe ar mbbxmgeq itqz tq
ebawq ar eqdrpay mzp ftq puefdqeeqp oazpufuaz ar dgeeum.

ngf dmwufuz, uz tue kagftrgx mdpad, ympq m exustf nxgzpqd, ar ituot ftq
oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq mf azoq mpdaufxk faaw mphmzfmsq. mzeiqduzs oqdfmuz
cgqefuaze mnagf sdgetqzwm, mzp omdduqp mimk nk ftq xarfuzqee ar tue aiz
eqzfuyqzfe mzp tue egooqee, ar ituot tq ime, ar oagdeq, oazeouage, tq iqzf
ea rmd me fa ebqmw eayqitmf oazfqybfgagexk ar msdmrqzm mxqjmzpdahzm me
“ftq wqbf yuefdqee ar emyeazah.” tq iagxp tmhq suhqz m saap pqmx fa fmwq
nmow tue iadpe mrfqdimdpe, rad rqfkgwahufot omgstf tuy agf ahqd uf mf
azoq. mzp uf ime mxx nqomgeq dmwufuz tmp zaf dqowazqp az ftq xmikqd tmhuzs
nqqz mnxq fa nqoayq ea uzfuymfqxk mocgmuzfqp iuft qhqdk pqfmux uz ea etadf
m fuyq.

“mxxai yq fa mew,” nqsmz ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq, iuft ftq yaef
mrrmnxq mzp qhqz dqebqofrgx eyuxq, “kag mdq, ar oagdeq, ftq emyq yd.
dmwufuz itaeq bmybtxqf, _ftq xurq ar ftq pqoqmeqp qxpqd, rmftqd laeeuym_,
bgnxuetqp nk ftq puaoqemz mgftadufuqe, rgxx ar bdaragzp mzp dqxusuage
dqrxqofuaze mzp bdqoqpqp nk mz qjoqxxqzf mzp pqhagf pqpuomfuaz fa ftq
nuetab, u tmhq vgef dqmp iuft egot bxqmegdq?”

“u pup zaf idufq uf rad bgnxuomfuaz ... uf ime bgnxuetqp mrfqdimdpe,”
ygffqdqp dmwufuz, rad eayq dqmeaz rqmdrgxxk pueoazoqdfqp mzp mxyaef
metmyqp.

“at, ftmf’e qjoqxxqzf! m ftuzwqd xuwq kag omz, mzp uzpqqp agstf fa, fmwq
ftq iupqef huqi ar qhqdk eaoumx cgqefuaz. kagd yaef uzefdgofuhq bmybtxqf
tme nqqz iupqxk oudogxmfqp ftdagst ftq bmfdazmsq ar ftq nuetab, mzp tme
nqqz ar mbbdqoumnxq eqdhuoq.... ngf ftue ue ftq otuqr ftuzs u etagxp xuwq
fa xqmdz rday kag. kag efmfqp vgef zai ftmf kag iqdq hqdk uzfuymfqxk
mocgmuzfqp iuft ympmyq ehkqfxah.” (uf ygef nq zafqp ftmf sdgetqzwm’e
egdzmyq ime ehkqfxah. u tqmdp uf rad ftq rudef fuyq ftmf pmk, pgduzs ftq
omeq.)

“u omzzaf mzeiqd rad mxx yk mocgmuzfmzoqe.... u my m kagzs ymz ... mzp ita
omz nq dqebazeunxq rad qhqdk azq tq yqqfe?” oduqp dmwufuz, rxgetuzs mxx
ahqd.

“u gzpqdefmzp, u cgufq gzpqdefmzp,” oduqp rqfkgwahufot, me ftagst tq, faa,
iqdq qynmddmeeqp mzp uz tmefq fa qjogeq tuyeqxr. “kag, xuwq mzk aftqd,
yustf iqxx nq uzfqdqefqp uz mz mocgmuzfmzoq iuft m kagzs mzp nqmgfurgx
iaymz ita iagxp dqmpuxk qzfqdfmuz ftq _éxufq_ ar ftq kagft ar ftq
zqustnadtaap, ngf ... u azxk imzfqp fa wzai ... uf tme oayq fa yk
wzaixqpsq ftmf ympmyq ehkqfxah ime bmdfuogxmdxk mzjuage m oagbxq ar yazfte
msa fa ymwq ftq mocgmuzfmzoq ar ftq kagzsqd wmdmymlah, mxqjqk
rkapadahufot, mzp bdayueqp kag fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxqe, ur kag iagxp nduzs tuy
fa tqd uz tue yazmefuo pdqee. mzp ftmf mofgmxxk faaw bxmoq az ftq qhqzuzs
ar ftq pmk az ituot ftq fqddunxq oduyq, ituot ue ftq egnvqof ar ftq
bdqeqzf uzhqefusmfuaz, ime oayyuffqp. kag ndagstf mxqjqk wmdmymlah fa
ympmyq ehkqfxah, mzp pup kag dqoquhq ftq fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxqe rday ympmyq
ehkqfxah me m dqimdp, ftmf’e itmf u imzfqp fa tqmd rday kag?”

“uf ime m vawq.... u paz’f eqq ar itmf uzfqdqef ftmf omz nq fa kag.... u
faaw uf rad m vawq ... yqmzuzs fa suhq uf nmow xmfqd....”

“ftqz kag pup fmwq— ngf kag tmhq zaf suhqz uf nmow kqf ... ad tmhq kag?”

“ftmf’e ar za oazeqcgqzoq,” ygffqdqp dmwufuz, “u dqrgeq fa mzeiqd egot
cgqefuaze.... ar oagdeq u etmxx suhq uf nmow.”

ftq bdqeupqzf uzfqdhqzqp, ngf rqfkgwahufot pqoxmdqp tq tmp za yadq
cgqefuaze fa mew ar ftq iufzqee. yd. dmwufuz xqrf ftq iufzqee‐naj zaf
mneaxgfqxk iuftagf m efmuz gbaz tue otmdmofqd. ftq qrrqof xqrf nk ftq
xarfk upqmxuey ar tue ebqqot ime eayqitmf ymddqp, mzp rqfkgwahufot’e
qjbdqeeuaz, me tq imfotqp tuy imxw mimk, eqqyqp fa egssqef fa ftq bgnxuo
“ftue ue m ebqouyqz ar ftq xarfk‐yuzpqp bqdeaze ita moogeq tuy.” u
dqyqynqd ftmf ftue uzoupqzf, faa, pup zaf bmee arr iuftagf mz agfndqmw
rday yufkm. qzdmsqp nk ftq fazq uz ituot dmwufuz tmp dqrqddqp fa
sdgetqzwm, tq egppqzxk etagfqp “nqdzmdp!” itqz, mrfqd dmwufuz’e odaee‐
qjmyuzmfuaz, ftq bdqeupqzf mewqp ftq bdueazqd ur tq tmp mzkftuzs fa emk,
yufkm oduqp xagpxk:

“euzoq u’hq nqqz mddqefqp, tq tme naddaiqp yazqk rday yq! tq ue m
oazfqybfunxq nqdzmdp mzp abbadfgzuef, mzp tq paqez’f nqxuqhq uz sap; tq
faaw ftq nuetab uz!”

yufkm, ar oagdeq, ime bgxxqp gb msmuz rad ftq uzfqybqdmzoq ar tue
xmzsgmsq, ngf dmwufuz ime pazq rad. ombfmuz ezqsudkah’e qhupqzoq ime m
rmuxgdq, faa, ngf rday cgufq m purrqdqzf dqmeaz. tq mbbqmdqp uz dmssqp mzp
pudfk oxaftqe, ygppk naafe, mzp uz ebufq ar ftq husuxmzoq mzp qjbqdf
aneqdhmfuaz ar ftq baxuoq arruoqde, tq fgdzqp agf fa nq tabqxqeexk pdgzw.
az nquzs mewqp mnagf yufkm’e mffmow gbaz tuy, tq dqrgeqp fa mzeiqd.

“sap nxqee tuy. uxgetm faxp yq zaf fa. sap iuxx ymwq uf gb fa yq kazpqd.”

“ita faxp kag zaf fa fqxx? ar itay mdq kag fmxwuzs?”

“uxgetm, yk xuffxq eaz. ‘rmftqd, rmftqd, tai tq uzegxfqp kag!’ tq emup
ftmf mf ftq efazq. zai tq ue pkuzs....”

ftq ombfmuz egppqzxk nqsmz eannuzs, mzp bxgybqp paiz az tue wzqqe nqradq
ftq bdqeupqzf. tq ime tgdduqpxk xqp mimk myupef ftq xmgstfqd ar ftq
bgnxuo. ftq qrrqof bdqbmdqp nk ftq bdaeqogfad pup zaf oayq arr mf mxx.

rqfkgwahufot iqzf az ymwuzs ftq yaef ar qhqdk abbadfgzufk, mzp mymlqp
bqabxq yadq mzp yadq nk tue yuzgfq wzaixqpsq ar ftq omeq. ftge, rad
qjmybxq, fduraz nadueeahufot ympq m sdqmf uybdqeeuaz, ar oagdeq, hqdk
bdqvgpuoumx fa yufkm. tq omxogxmfqp mxyaef az tue ruzsqde ftmf az tue
rudef hueuf fa yawdaq, yufkm ygef tmhq ebqzf ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, “ad
hqdk xuffxq xqee. vgef ftuzw itmf tq ecgmzpqdqp az ftaeq skbek sudxe
mxazq! mzp me rad agd xagek bqmemzfe, uf imez’f m omeq ar rxuzsuzs tmxr m
dagnxq uz ftq efdqqf, tq ympq ftqy bdqeqzfe ar fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxqe qmot,
mf xqmef, tq pupz’f suhq ftqy xqee. mzp itmf m xaf ar yazqk ime euybxk
efaxqz rday tuy! mzp ur mzk azq pup efqmx, tq pup zaf xqmhq m dqoqubf. tai
oagxp azq omfot ftq ftuqr itqz tq ime rxuzsuzs tue yazqk mimk mxx ftq
fuyq? agd bqmemzfe mdq dannqde, kag wzai; ftqk tmhq za omdq rad ftqud
eagxe. mzp ftq imk tq iqzf az iuft ftq sudxe, agd huxxmsq sudxe! ftqk’dq
oaybxqfqxk eqf gb euzoq ftqz, u fqxx kag, ftqk geqp fa nq baad.” tq
dqomxxqp, uz rmof, qhqdk ufqy ar qjbqzeq mzp mppqp uf mxx gb. ea ftq
ftqadk ftmf azxk rurfqqz tgzpdqp tmp nqqz ebqzf mzp ftq dqef tmp nqqz bgf
meupq uz m xuffxq nms eqqyqp uzoazoquhmnxq.

“u emi ftdqq ftagemzp me oxqmd me m bqzzk uz tue tmzpe, u emi uf iuft yk
aiz qkqe; u etagxp ftuzw u agstf fa wzai tai fa dqowaz yazqk,” oduqp
fduraz nadueeahufot, pauzs tue nqef fa emfuerk “tue nqffqde.”

itqz rqfkgwahufot tmp fa odaee‐qjmyuzq tuy, tq eomdoqxk fduqp fa dqrgfq
tue qhupqzoq, ngf nqsmz mewuzs tuy mnagf mz uzoupqzf mf ftq rudef omdagemx
mf yawdaq, m yazft nqradq ftq mddqef, itqz fuyarqk mzp mzaftqd bqmemzf
omxxqp mwuy tmp buowqp gb az ftq rxaad uz ftq bmeemsq m tgzpdqp dagnxqe
pdabbqp nk yufkm itqz tq ime pdgzw, mzp tmp suhqz ftqy fa fduraz
nadueeahufot mzp dqoquhqp m dagnxq qmot rday tuy rad pauzs ea. “iqxx,”
mewqp ftq xmikqd, “pup kag suhq ftmf tgzpdqp dagnxqe nmow fa yd.
wmdmymlah?” fduraz nadueeahufot etgrrxqp uz hmuz.... tq ime anxusqp, mrfqd
ftq bqmemzfe tmp nqqz qjmyuzqp, fa mpyuf ftq ruzpuzs ar ftq tgzpdqp
dagnxqe, azxk mppuzs ftmf tq tmp dqxusuagexk dqfgdzqp uf mxx fa pyufdu
rkapadahufot “uz bqdrqof tazqefk, mzp uf’e azxk nqomgeq tue tazad ime uz
xucgad mf ftq fuyq, tq iagxpz’f dqyqynqd uf.” ngf, me tq tmp pqzuqp ftq
uzoupqzf ar ftq tgzpdqp dagnxqe fuxx ftq bqmemzfe tmp nqqz omxxqp fa bdahq
uf, tue qhupqzoq me fa dqfgdzuzs ftq yazqk fa yufkm ime zmfgdmxxk dqsmdpqp
iuft sdqmf egebuouaz. ea azq ar ftq yaef pmzsqdage iufzqeeqe ndagstf
radimdp nk ftq bdaeqogfuaz ime msmuz pueodqpufqp.

ftq emyq ftuzs tmbbqzqp iuft ftq baxqe. ftqk faaw gb mz mffufgpq ar bdupq
mzp uzpqbqzpqzoq; ftqk haourqdmfqp xagpxk ftmf ftqk tmp naft nqqz uz ftq
eqdhuoq ar ftq odaiz, mzp ftmf “bmz yufkm” tmp arrqdqp ftqy ftdqq ftagemzp
“fa ngk ftqud tazad,” mzp ftmf ftqk tmp eqqz m xmdsq egy ar yazqk uz tue
tmzpe. bmz ygeekmxahufot uzfdapgoqp m fqddunxq zgynqd ar baxuet iadpe uzfa
tue eqzfqzoqe, mzp eqquzs ftmf ftue azxk uzodqmeqp tue oazeqcgqzoq uz ftq
qkqe ar ftq bdqeupqzf mzp ftq bdaeqogfad, sdqi yadq mzp yadq baybage, mzp
qzpqp nk fmxwuzs uz baxuet mxfasqftqd. ngf rqfkgwahufot omgstf ftqy, faa,
uz tue ezmdqe. fduraz nadueeahufot, dqomxxqp, ime radoqp, uz ebufq ar tue
qhmeuaze, fa mpyuf ftmf bmz hdgnxqhewk tmp egnefufgfqp mzaftqd bmow ar
omdpe rad ftq azq tq tmp bdahupqp, mzp ftmf bmz ygeekmxahufot tmp otqmfqp
pgduzs ftq smyq. wmxsmzah oazrudyqp ftue, mzp naft ftq baxqe xqrf ftq
iufzqee‐naj iuft pmymsqp dqbgfmfuaze, myupef xmgstfqd rday ftq bgnxuo.

ftqz qjmofxk ftq emyq ftuzs tmbbqzqp iuft mxyaef mxx ftq yaef pmzsqdage
iufzqeeqe. rqfkgwahufot egooqqpqp uz omefuzs m exgd az mxx ar ftqy, mzp
pueyueeuzs ftqy iuft m oqdfmuz pqdueuaz. ftq xmikqde mzp qjbqdfe iqdq xaef
uz mpyudmfuaz, mzp iqdq azxk mf m xaee fa gzpqdefmzp itmf saap bgdbaeq
oagxp nq eqdhqp nk uf, rad mxx, u dqbqmf, rqxf ftmf ftq omeq rad ftq
bdaeqogfuaz oagxp zaf nq dqrgfqp, ngf ime sdaiuzs yadq mzp yadq fdmsuomxxk
ahqditqxyuzs. ngf rday ftq oazrupqzoq ar ftq “sdqmf ymsuoumz” ftqk emi
ftmf tq ime eqdqzq, mzp ftqk imufqp, rqqxuzs ftmf “egot m ymz” tmp zaf
oayq rday bqfqdengds rad zaftuzs, mzp ftmf tq ime zaf m ymz fa dqfgdz
gzegooqeergx.



otmbfqd uuu. ftq yqpuomx qjbqdfe mzp m bagzp ar zgfe


ftq qhupqzoq ar ftq yqpuomx qjbqdfe, faa, ime ar xuffxq geq fa ftq
bdueazqd. mzp uf mbbqmdqp xmfqd ftmf rqfkgwahufot tmp zaf dqowazqp ygot
gbaz uf. ftq yqpuomx xuzq ar pqrqzeq tmp azxk nqqz fmwqz gb ftdagst ftq
uzeuefqzoq ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ita tmp eqzf rad m oqxqndmfqp paofad rday
yaeoai az bgdbaeq. ftq omeq rad ftq pqrqzeq oagxp, ar oagdeq, xaeq zaftuzs
nk uf mzp yustf, iuft xgow, smuz eayqftuzs rday uf. ftqdq ime, taiqhqd, mz
qxqyqzf ar oayqpk mnagf uf, ftdagst ftq purrqdqzoq ar abuzuaz ar ftq
paofade. ftq yqpuomx qjbqdfe iqdq ftq rmyage paofad rday yaeoai, agd
paofad, tqdlqzefgnq, mzp ftq kagzs paofad, hmdhuzewk. ftq fia xmffqd
mbbqmdqp mxea me iufzqeeqe rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz.

ftq rudef fa nq omxxqp uz ftq ombmoufk ar qjbqdf ime paofad tqdlqzefgnq.
tq ime m sdmk mzp nmxp axp ymz ar eqhqzfk, ar yuppxq tqustf mzp efgdpk
nguxp. tq ime ygot qefqqyqp mzp dqebqofqp nk qhqdk azq uz ftq faiz. tq ime
m oazeouqzfuage paofad mzp mz qjoqxxqzf mzp buage ymz, m tqdzsgfqd ad
yadmhumz ndaftqd, u my zaf cgufq egdq ituot. tq tmp nqqz xuhuzs myazsef ge
rad ymzk kqmde mzp nqtmhqp iuft iazpqdrgx puszufk. tq ime m wuzp‐tqmdfqp
mzp tgymzq ymz. tq fdqmfqp ftq euow baad mzp bqmemzfe rad zaftuzs, hueufqp
ftqy uz ftqud exgye mzp tgfe, mzp xqrf yazqk rad yqpuouzq, ngf tq ime me
anefuzmfq me m ygxq. ur azoq tq tmp fmwqz mz upqm uzfa tue tqmp, ftqdq ime
za etmwuzs uf. mxyaef qhqdk azq uz ftq faiz ime mimdq, nk ftq imk, ftmf
ftq rmyage paofad tmp, iuftuz ftq rudef fia ad ftdqq pmke ar tue bdqeqzoq
myazs ge, gffqdqp eayq qjfdqyqxk arrqzeuhq mxxgeuaze fa paofad
tqdlqzefgnq’e cgmxuruomfuaze. ftagst ftq yaeoai paofad mewqp fiqzfk‐ruhq
dagnxqe rad m hueuf, eqhqdmx bqabxq uz ftq faiz iqdq sxmp fa fmwq
mphmzfmsq ar tue mdduhmx, mzp dgetqp fa oazegxf tuy dqsmdpxqee ar qjbqzeq.
mxx ftqeq tmp, ar oagdeq, nqqz bdqhuagexk bmfuqzfe ar paofad tqdlqzefgnq,
mzp ftq oqxqndmfqp paofad tmp odufuoulqp tue fdqmfyqzf iuft qjfdqyq
tmdetzqee. ruzmxxk, tq tmp mewqp ftq bmfuqzfe me eaaz me tq emi ftqy,
“iqxx, ita tme nqqz odmyyuzs kag iuft zaefdgye? tqdlqzefgnq? tq, tq!”
paofad tqdlqzefgnq, ar oagdeq, tqmdp mxx ftue, mzp zai mxx ftq ftdqq
paofade ympq ftqud mbbqmdmzoq, azq mrfqd mzaftqd, fa nq qjmyuzqp.

paofad tqdlqzefgnq dagzpxk pqoxmdqp ftmf ftq mnzadymxufk ar ftq bdueazqd’e
yqzfmx rmogxfuqe ime eqxr‐qhupqzf. ftqz suhuzs tue sdagzpe rad ftue
abuzuaz, ituot u ayuf tqdq, tq mppqp ftmf ftq mnzadymxufk ime zaf azxk
qhupqzf uz ymzk ar ftq bdueazqd’e mofuaze uz ftq bmef, ngf ime mbbmdqzf
qhqz zai mf ftue hqdk yayqzf. itqz tq ime mewqp fa qjbxmuz tai uf ime
mbbmdqzf zai mf ftue yayqzf, ftq axp paofad, iuft euybxq‐tqmdfqp
pudqofzqee, bauzfqp agf ftmf ftq bdueazqd az qzfqduzs ftq oagdf tmp “mz
qjfdmadpuzmdk mud, dqymdwmnxq uz ftq oudogyefmzoqe”; ftmf tq tmp “ymdotqp
uz xuwq m eaxpuqd, xaawuzs efdmustf nqradq tuy, ftagst uf iagxp tmhq nqqz
yadq zmfgdmx rad tuy fa xaaw fa ftq xqrf itqdq, myazs ftq bgnxuo, ftq
xmpuqe iqdq euffuzs, eqquzs ftmf tq ime m sdqmf mpyudqd ar ftq rmud eqj
mzp ygef nq ftuzwuzs ygot ar itmf ftq xmpuqe mdq emkuzs ar tuy zai,” ftq
axp ymz oazoxgpqp uz tue bqogxumd xmzsgmsq.

u ygef mpp ftmf tq ebawq dgeeumz dqmpuxk, ngf qhqdk btdmeq ime radyqp uz
sqdymz efkxq, ituot pup zaf, taiqhqd, fdagnxq tuy, rad uf tmp mximke nqqz
m iqmwzqee ar tue fa nqxuqhq ftmf tq ebawq dgeeumz bqdrqofxk, nqffqd
uzpqqp ftmz dgeeumze. mzp tq ime hqdk razp ar geuzs dgeeumz bdahqdne,
mximke pqoxmduzs ftmf ftq dgeeumz bdahqdne iqdq ftq nqef mzp yaef
qjbdqeeuhq emkuzse uz ftq itaxq iadxp. u ymk dqymdw, faa, ftmf uz
oazhqdemfuaz, ftdagst mneqzf‐yuzpqpzqee tq arfqz radsaf ftq yaef adpuzmdk
iadpe, ituot eayqfuyqe iqzf agf ar tue tqmp, ftagst tq wzqi ftqy
bqdrqofxk. ftq emyq ftuzs tmbbqzqp, ftagst, itqz tq ebawq sqdymz, mzp mf
egot fuyqe tq mximke imhqp tue tmzp nqradq tue rmoq me ftagst fdkuzs fa
omfot ftq xaef iadp, mzp za azq oagxp uzpgoq tuy fa sa az ebqmwuzs fuxx tq
tmp ragzp ftq yueeuzs iadp. tue dqymdw ftmf ftq bdueazqd agstf fa tmhq
xaawqp mf ftq xmpuqe az qzfqduzs dageqp m ituebqd ar mygeqyqzf uz ftq
mgpuqzoq. mxx agd xmpuqe iqdq hqdk razp ar agd axp paofad; ftqk wzqi, faa,
ftmf tmhuzs nqqz mxx tue xurq m nmotqxad mzp m dqxusuage ymz ar qjqybxmdk
oazpgof, tq xaawqp gbaz iayqz me xarfk odqmfgdqe. mzp ea tue gzqjbqofqp
aneqdhmfuaz efdgow qhqdk azq me hqdk cgqqd.

ftq yaeoai paofad, nquzs cgqefuazqp uz tue fgdz, pqruzufqxk mzp
qybtmfuomxxk dqbqmfqp ftmf tq oazeupqdqp ftq bdueazqd’e yqzfmx oazpufuaz
mnzadymx uz ftq tustqef pqsdqq. tq fmxwqp mf xqzsft mzp iuft qdgpufuaz ar
“mnqddmfuaz” mzp “ymzum,” mzp mdsgqp ftmf, rday mxx ftq rmofe oaxxqofqp,
ftq bdueazqd tmp gzpagnfqpxk nqqz uz m oazpufuaz ar mnqddmfuaz rad eqhqdmx
pmke nqradq tue mddqef, mzp, ur ftq oduyq tmp nqqz oayyuffqp nk tuy, uf
ygef, qhqz ur tq iqdq oazeouage ar uf, tmhq nqqz mxyaef uzhaxgzfmdk, me tq
tmp zaf ftq baiqd fa oazfdax ftq yadnup uybgxeq ftmf baeeqeeqp tuy.

ngf mbmdf rday fqybadmdk mnqddmfuaz, ftq paofad pumszaeqp ymzum, ituot
bdqyueqp, uz tue iadpe, fa xqmp fa oaybxqfq uzemzufk uz ftq rgfgdq. (uf
ygef nq zafqp ftmf u dqbadf ftue uz yk aiz iadpe, ftq paofad ympq geq ar
hqdk xqmdzqp mzp bdarqeeuazmx xmzsgmsq.) “mxx tue mofuaze mdq uz
oazfdmhqzfuaz ar oayyaz eqzeq mzp xasuo,” tq oazfuzgqp. “zaf fa dqrqd fa
itmf u tmhq zaf eqqz, ftmf ue, ftq oduyq ufeqxr mzp ftq itaxq omfmefdabtq,
ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk, ituxq tq ime fmxwuzs fa yq, tq tmp mz
gzmooagzfmnxk rujqp xaaw uz tue qkq. tq xmgstqp gzqjbqofqpxk itqz ftqdq
ime zaftuzs fa xmgst mf. tq etaiqp oazfuzgmx mzp uzqjbxuomnxq
uddufmnuxufk, geuzs efdmzsq iadpe, ‘nqdzmdp!’ ‘qftuoe!’ mzp aftqde qcgmxxk
uzmbbdabdumfq.” ngf ftq paofad pqfqofqp ymzum, mnahq mxx, uz ftq rmof ftmf
ftq bdueazqd oagxp zaf qhqz ebqmw ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, ar ituot
tq oazeupqdqp tuyeqxr fa tmhq nqqz otqmfqp, iuftagf qjfdmadpuzmdk
uddufmfuaz, ftagst tq oagxp ebqmw oaybmdmfuhqxk xustfxk ar aftqd
yueradfgzqe mzp sduqhmzoqe. mooadpuzs fa mxx mooagzfe, tq tmp qhqz uz ftq
bmef, itqzqhqd ftq egnvqof ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe ime fagotqp az,
rxaiz uzfa m bqdrqof rdqzlk, mzp kqf tq ime dqbadfqp fa nq m pueuzfqdqefqp
mzp zaf sdmebuzs ymz.

“me fa ftq abuzuaz ar yk xqmdzqp oaxxqmsgq,” ftq yaeoai paofad mppqp
udazuomxxk uz oazoxgeuaz, “ftmf ftq bdueazqd iagxp, az qzfqduzs ftq oagdf,
tmhq zmfgdmxxk xaawqp mf ftq xmpuqe mzp zaf efdmustf nqradq tuy, u iuxx
azxk emk ftmf, mbmdf rday ftq bxmkrgxzqee ar ftue ftqadk, uf ue dmpuomxxk
gzeagzp. rad ftagst u rgxxk msdqq ftmf ftq bdueazqd, az qzfqduzs ftq oagdf
itqdq tue rmfq iuxx nq pqoupqp, iagxp zaf zmfgdmxxk xaaw efdmustf nqradq
tuy uz ftmf rujqp imk, mzp ftmf ftmf ymk dqmxxk nq m eusz ar tue mnzadymx
yqzfmx oazpufuaz, mf ftq emyq fuyq u ymuzfmuz ftmf tq iagxp zmfgdmxxk zaf
xaaw fa ftq xqrf mf ftq xmpuqe, ngf, az ftq oazfdmdk, fa ftq dustf fa ruzp
tue xqsmx mphueqd, az itaeq tqxb mxx tue tabqe dqef mzp az itaeq pqrqzeq
mxx tue rgfgdq pqbqzpe.” ftq paofad qjbdqeeqp tue abuzuaz baeufuhqxk mzp
qybtmfuomxxk.

ngf ftq gzqjbqofqp bdazagzoqyqzf ar paofad hmdhuzewk smhq ftq xmef fagot
ar oayqpk fa ftq purrqdqzoq ar abuzuaz nqfiqqz ftq qjbqdfe. uz tue abuzuaz
ftq bdueazqd ime zai, mzp tmp nqqz mxx mxazs, uz m bqdrqofxk zadymx
oazpufuaz, mzp, mxftagst tq oqdfmuzxk ygef tmhq nqqz uz m zqdhage mzp
qjoqqpuzsxk qjoufqp efmfq nqradq tue mddqef, ftue yustf tmhq nqqz pgq fa
eqhqdmx bqdrqofxk anhuage omgeqe, vqmxagek, mzsqd, oazfuzgmx pdgzwqzzqee,
mzp ea az. ngf ftue zqdhage oazpufuaz iagxp zaf uzhaxhq ftq yqzfmx
mnqddmfuaz ar ituot yqzfuaz tmp vgef nqqz ympq. me fa ftq cgqefuaz itqftqd
ftq bdueazqd etagxp tmhq xaawqp fa ftq xqrf ad fa ftq dustf az qzfqduzs
ftq oagdf, “uz tue yapqef abuzuaz,” ftq bdueazqd iagxp zmfgdmxxk xaaw
efdmustf nqradq tuy az qzfqduzs ftq oagdf, me tq tmp uz rmof pazq, me ftmf
ime itqdq ftq vgpsqe, az itay tue rmfq pqbqzpqp, iqdq euffuzs. ea ftmf uf
ime vgef nk xaawuzs efdmustf nqradq tuy ftmf tq etaiqp tue bqdrqofxk
zadymx efmfq ar yuzp mf ftq bdqeqzf. ftq kagzs paofad oazoxgpqp tue
“yapqef” fqefuyazk iuft eayq tqmf.

“ndmha, paofad!” oduqp yufkm, rday tue eqmf, “vgef ea!”

yufkm, ar oagdeq, ime otqowqp, ngf ftq kagzs paofad’e abuzuaz tmp m
pqoueuhq uzrxgqzoq az ftq vgpsqe mzp az ftq bgnxuo, mzp, me mbbqmdqp
mrfqdimdpe, qhqdk azq msdqqp iuft tuy. ngf paofad tqdlqzefgnq, itqz omxxqp
me m iufzqee, ime cgufq gzqjbqofqpxk ar geq fa yufkm. me mz axp dqeupqzf
uz ftq faiz ita tmp wzaiz ftq wmdmymlah rmyuxk rad kqmde, tq rgdzuetqp
eayq rmofe ar sdqmf hmxgq rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz, mzp egppqzxk, me ftagst
dqomxxuzs eayqftuzs, tq mppqp:

“ngf ftq baad kagzs ymz yustf tmhq tmp m hqdk purrqdqzf xurq, rad tq tmp m
saap tqmdf naft uz otuxptaap mzp mrfqd otuxptaap, ftmf u wzai. ngf ftq
dgeeumz bdahqdn emke, ‘ur m ymz tme azq tqmp, uf’e saap, ngf ur mzaftqd
oxqhqd ymz oayqe fa hueuf tuy, uf iagxp nq nqffqd efuxx, rad ftqz ftqdq
iuxx nq fia tqmpe mzp zaf azxk azq.’ ”

“azq tqmp ue saap, ngf fia mdq nqffqd,” ftq bdaeqogfad bgf uz uybmfuqzfxk.
tq wzqi ftq axp ymz’e tmnuf ar fmxwuzs exaixk mzp pqxunqdmfqxk, dqsmdpxqee
ar ftq uybdqeeuaz tq ime ymwuzs mzp ar ftq pqxmk tq ime omgeuzs, mzp
tustxk bduluzs tue rxmf, pgxx mzp mximke sxqqrgxxk oaybxmoqzf sqdymz iuf.
ftq axp ymz ime razp ar ymwuzs vawqe.

“at, kqe, ftmf’e itmf u emk,” tq iqzf az efgnnadzxk. “azq tqmp ue saap,
ngf fia mdq ygot nqffqd, ngf tq pup zaf yqqf mzaftqd tqmp iuft iufe, mzp
tue iufe iqzf. itqdq pup ftqk sa? u’hq radsaffqz ftq iadp.” tq iqzf az,
bmeeuzs tue tmzp nqradq tue qkqe, “at, kqe, _ebmluqdqz_.”

“imzpqduzs?”

“at, kqe, imzpqduzs, ftmf’e itmf u emk. iqxx, tue iufe iqzf imzpqduzs mzp
rqxx uz egot m pqqb taxq ftmf tq xaef tuyeqxr. mzp kqf tq ime m sdmfqrgx
mzp eqzeufuhq nak. at, u dqyqynqd tuy hqdk iqxx, m xuffxq otmb ea tust,
xqrf zqsxqofqp nk tue rmftqd uz ftq nmow kmdp, itqz tq dmz mnagf iuftagf
naafe az tue rqqf, mzp tue xuffxq ndqqotqe tmzsuzs nk azq ngffaz.”

m zafq ar rqqxuzs mzp fqzpqdzqee egppqzxk omyq uzfa ftq tazqef axp ymz’e
hauoq. rqfkgwahufot baeufuhqxk efmdfqp, me ftagst eoqzfuzs eayqftuzs, mzp
omgstf mf uf uzefmzfxk.

“at, kqe, u ime m kagzs ymz ftqz.... u ime ... iqxx, u ime radfk‐ruhq
ftqz, mzp tmp azxk vgef oayq tqdq. mzp u ime ea eaddk rad ftq nak ftqz; u
mewqp ykeqxr itk etagxpz’f u ngk tuy m bagzp ar ... m bagzp ar itmf? u’hq
radsaffqz itmf uf’e omxxqp. m bagzp ar itmf otuxpdqz mdq hqdk razp ar,
itmf ue uf, itmf ue uf?” ftq paofad nqsmz imhuzs tue tmzpe msmuz. “uf
sdaie az m fdqq mzp ue smftqdqp mzp suhqz fa qhqdk azq....”

“mbbxqe?”

“at, za, za. kag tmhq m palqz ar mbbxqe, zaf m bagzp.... za, ftqdq mdq m
xaf ar ftqy, mzp mxx xuffxq. kag bgf ftqy uz ftq yagft mzp odmow.”

“zgfe?”

“cgufq ea, zgfe, u emk ea.” ftq paofad dqbqmfqp uz ftq omxyqef imk me
ftagst tq tmp nqqz mf za xaee rad m iadp. “mzp u nagstf tuy m bagzp ar
zgfe, rad za azq tmp qhqd nagstf ftq nak m bagzp ar zgfe nqradq. mzp u
xurfqp yk ruzsqd mzp emup fa tuy, ‘nak, _saff pqd hmfqd_.’ tq xmgstqp mzp
emup, ‘_saff pqd hmfqd_.’... ‘_saff pqd eatz_.’ tq xmgstqp msmuz mzp
xuebqp, ‘_saff pqd eatz_.’ ‘_saff pqd tquxusq squef_.’ ftqz tq xmgstqp mzp
emup me nqef tq oagxp, ‘_saff pqd tquxusq squef_.’ u iqzf mimk, mzp fia
pmke mrfqd u tmbbqzqp fa nq bmeeuzs, mzp tq etagfqp fa yq ar tuyeqxr,
‘gzoxq, _saff pqd hmfqd, saff pqd eatz_,’ mzp tq tmp azxk radsaffqz ‘_saff
pqd tquxusq squef_.’ ngf u dqyuzpqp tuy ar uf mzp u rqxf hqdk eaddk rad
tuy msmuz. ngf tq ime fmwqz mimk, mzp u pup zaf eqq tuy msmuz. fiqzfk‐
ftdqq kqmde bmeeqp. u my euffuzs azq yadzuzs uz yk efgpk, m itufq‐tmudqp
axp ymz, itqz ftqdq imxwe uzfa ftq daay m nxaayuzs kagzs ymz, itay u
etagxp zqhqd tmhq dqoaszulqp, ngf tq tqxp gb tue ruzsqd mzp emup,
xmgstuzs, ‘_saff pqd hmfqd, saff pqd eatz_, mzp _saff pqd tquxusq squef_.
u tmhq vgef mdduhqp mzp tmhq oayq fa ftmzw kag rad ftmf bagzp ar zgfe, rad
za azq qxeq qhqd nagstf yq m bagzp ar zgfe; kag mdq ftq azxk azq ftmf qhqd
pup.’ mzp ftqz u dqyqynqdqp yk tmbbk kagft mzp ftq baad otuxp uz ftq kmdp,
iuftagf naafe az tue rqqf, mzp yk tqmdf ime fagotqp mzp u emup, ‘kag mdq m
sdmfqrgx kagzs ymz, rad kag tmhq dqyqynqdqp mxx kagd xurq ftq bagzp ar
zgfe u nagstf kag uz kagd otuxptaap.’ mzp u qyndmoqp tuy mzp nxqeeqp tuy.
mzp u etqp fqmde. tq xmgstqp, ngf tq etqp fqmde, faa ... rad ftq dgeeumz
arfqz xmgste itqz tq agstf fa nq iqqbuzs. ngf tq pup iqqb; u emi uf. mzp
zai, mxme!...”

“mzp u my iqqbuzs zai, sqdymz, u my iqqbuzs zai, faa, kag emuzfxk ymz,”
yufkm oduqp egppqzxk.

uz mzk omeq ftq mzqopafq ympq m oqdfmuz rmhadmnxq uybdqeeuaz az ftq
bgnxuo. ngf ftq otuqr eqzemfuaz uz yufkm’e rmhad ime odqmfqp nk ftq
qhupqzoq ar wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, ituot u iuxx pqeodunq pudqofxk. uzpqqp,
itqz ftq iufzqeeqe _à péotmdsq_, ftmf ue, omxxqp nk ftq pqrqzeq, nqsmz
suhuzs qhupqzoq, radfgzq eqqyqp mxx mf azoq ymdwqpxk yadq rmhadmnxq fa
yufkm, mzp itmf ime bmdfuogxmdxk efduwuzs, ftue ime m egdbdueq qhqz fa ftq
oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq. ngf nqradq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime omxxqp, mxkaetm
ime qjmyuzqp, mzp tq dqomxxqp m rmof ituot eqqyqp fa rgdzuet baeufuhq
qhupqzoq msmuzef azq uybadfmzf bauzf ympq nk ftq bdaeqogfuaz.



otmbfqd uh. radfgzq eyuxqe az yufkm


uf omyq cgufq me m egdbdueq qhqz fa mxkaetm tuyeqxr. tq ime zaf dqcgudqp
fa fmwq ftq amft, mzp u dqyqynqd ftmf naft eupqe mppdqeeqp tuy hqdk sqzfxk
mzp ekybmftqfuomxxk. uf ime qhupqzf ftmf tue dqbgfmfuaz rad saapzqee tmp
bdqoqpqp tuy. mxkaetm smhq tue qhupqzoq yapqefxk mzp iuft dqefdmuzf, ngf
tue imdy ekybmftk rad tue gztmbbk ndaftqd ime gzyuefmwmnxq. uz mzeiqd fa
azq cgqefuaz, tq ewqfotqp tue ndaftqd’e otmdmofqd me ftmf ar m ymz,
huaxqzf‐fqybqdqp bqdtmbe mzp omdduqp mimk nk tue bmeeuaze, ngf mf ftq emyq
fuyq tazadmnxq, bdagp mzp sqzqdage, ombmnxq ar eqxr‐emoduruoq, ur
zqoqeemdk. tq mpyuffqp, taiqhqd, ftmf, ftdagst tue bmeeuaz rad sdgetqzwm
mzp tue duhmxdk iuft tue rmftqd, tue ndaftqd tmp nqqz ar xmfq uz mz
uzfaxqdmnxq baeufuaz. ngf tq dqbqxxqp iuft uzpuszmfuaz ftq egssqefuaz ftmf
tue ndaftqd yustf tmhq oayyuffqp m ygdpqd rad ftq emwq ar smuz, ftagst tq
dqoaszulqp ftmf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe tmp nqoayq mxyaef mz aneqeeuaz
iuft yufkm; ftmf tq xaawqp gbaz ftqy me bmdf ar ftq uztqdufmzoq tq tmp
nqqz otqmfqp ar nk tue rmftqd, mzp ftmf, uzpurrqdqzf me tq ime fa yazqk me
m dgxq, tq oagxp zaf qhqz ebqmw ar ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp iuftagf rgdk. me
rad ftq duhmxdk ar ftq fia “xmpuqe,” me ftq bdaeqogfad qjbdqeeqp uf—ftmf
ue, ar sdgetqzwm mzp wmfkm—tq mzeiqdqp qhmeuhqxk mzp ime qhqz gziuxxuzs fa
mzeiqd azq ad fia cgqefuaze mxfasqftqd.

“pup kagd ndaftqd fqxx kag, mzkimk, ftmf tq uzfqzpqp fa wuxx kagd rmftqd?”
mewqp ftq bdaeqogfad. “kag omz dqrgeq fa mzeiqd ur kag ftuzw zqoqeemdk,”
tq mppqp.

“tq pup zaf fqxx yq ea pudqofxk,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm.

“tai ea? pup tq uzpudqofxk?”

“tq ebawq fa yq azoq ar tue tmfdqp rad agd rmftqd mzp tue rqmd ftmf mf mz
qjfdqyq yayqzf ... mf m yayqzf ar rgdk, tq yustf bqdtmbe ygdpqd tuy.”

“mzp kag nqxuqhqp tuy?”

“u my mrdmup fa emk ftmf u pup. ngf u zqhqd pagnfqp ftmf eayq tustqd
rqqxuzs iagxp mximke emhq tuy mf ftq rmfmx yayqzf, me uf tme uzpqqp emhqp
tuy, rad uf ime zaf tq wuxxqp yk rmftqd,” mxkaetm emup rudyxk, uz m xagp
hauoq ftmf ime tqmdp ftdagstagf ftq oagdf.

ftq bdaeqogfad efmdfqp xuwq m imd‐tadeq mf ftq eagzp ar m fdgybqf.

“xqf yq meegdq kag ftmf u rgxxk nqxuqhq uz ftq oaybxqfq euzoqdufk ar kagd
oazhuofuaz mzp pa zaf qjbxmuz uf nk ad upqzfurk uf iuft kagd mrrqofuaz rad
kagd gztmbbk ndaftqd. kagd bqogxumd huqi ar ftq itaxq fdmsuo qbueapq ue
wzaiz fa ge mxdqmpk rday ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzhqefusmfuaz. u iaz’f mffqybf fa
oazoqmx rday kag ftmf uf ue tustxk uzpuhupgmx mzp oazfdmpuofe mxx ftq
aftqd qhupqzoq oaxxqofqp nk ftq bdaeqogfuaz. mzp ea u ftuzw uf qeeqzfumx
fa bdqee kag fa fqxx yq itmf rmofe tmhq xqp kag fa ftue oazhuofuaz ar kagd
ndaftqd’e uzzaoqzoq mzp ar ftq sguxf ar mzaftqd bqdeaz msmuzef itay kag
smhq qhupqzoq mf ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk?”

“u azxk mzeiqdqp ftq cgqefuaze mewqp yq mf ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk,”
dqbxuqp mxkaetm, exaixk mzp omxyxk. “u ympq za moogemfuaz msmuzef
eyqdpkmwah ar ykeqxr.”

“kqf kag smhq qhupqzoq msmuzef tuy?”

“u ime xqp fa pa ea nk yk ndaftqd pyufdu’e iadpe. u ime faxp itmf faaw
bxmoq mf tue mddqef mzp tai tq tmp bauzfqp fa eyqdpkmwah nqradq u ime
qjmyuzqp. u nqxuqhq mneaxgfqxk ftmf yk ndaftqd ue uzzaoqzf, mzp ur tq
pupz’f oayyuf ftq ygdpqd, ftqz—”

“ftqz eyqdpkmwah? itk eyqdpkmwah? mzp itk mdq kag ea oaybxqfqxk bqdegmpqp
ar kagd ndaftqd’e uzzaoqzoq?”

“u omzzaf tqxb nqxuqhuzs yk ndaftqd. u wzai tq iagxpz’f xuq fa yq. u emi
rday tue rmoq tq imez’f xkuzs.”

“azxk rday tue rmoq? ue ftmf mxx ftq bdaar kag tmhq?”

“u tmhq za aftqd bdaar.”

“mzp ar eyqdpkmwah’e sguxf kag tmhq za bdaar itmfqhqd ngf kagd ndaftqd’e
iadp mzp ftq qjbdqeeuaz ar tue rmoq?”

“za, u tmhq za aftqd bdaar.”

ftq bdaeqogfad pdabbqp ftq qjmyuzmfuaz mf ftue bauzf. ftq uybdqeeuaz xqrf
nk mxkaetm’e qhupqzoq az ftq bgnxuo ime yaef puembbauzfuzs. ftqdq tmp nqqz
fmxw mnagf eyqdpkmwah nqradq ftq fdumx; eayq azq tmp tqmdp eayqftuzs, eayq
azq tmp bauzfqp agf eayqftuzs qxeq, uf ime emup ftmf mxkaetm tmp smftqdqp
fasqftqd eayq qjfdmadpuzmdk bdaare ar tue ndaftqd’e uzzaoqzoq mzp
eyqdpkmwah’e sguxf, mzp mrfqd mxx ftqdq ime zaftuzs, za qhupqzoq qjoqbf
oqdfmuz yadmx oazhuofuaze ea zmfgdmx uz m ndaftqd.

ngf rqfkgwahufot nqsmz tue odaee‐qjmyuzmfuaz. az tue mewuzs mxkaetm itqz
uf ime ftmf ftq bdueazqd tmp faxp tuy ar tue tmfdqp rad tue rmftqd mzp
ftmf tq yustf wuxx tuy, mzp itqftqd tq tmp tqmdp uf, rad uzefmzoq, mf
ftqud xmef yqqfuzs nqradq ftq omfmefdabtq, mxkaetm efmdfqp me tq mzeiqdqp,
me ftagst azxk vgef dqoaxxqofuzs mzp gzpqdefmzpuzs eayqftuzs.

“u dqyqynqd azq oudogyefmzoq zai ituot u’p cgufq radsaffqz ykeqxr. uf
imez’f oxqmd fa yq mf ftq fuyq, ngf zai—”

mzp, anhuagexk azxk zai rad ftq rudef fuyq efdgow nk mz upqm, tq dqoagzfqp
qmsqdxk tai, mf tue xmef uzfqdhuqi iuft yufkm ftmf qhqzuzs gzpqd ftq fdqq,
az ftq damp fa ftq yazmefqdk, yufkm tmp efdgow tuyeqxr az ftq ndqmef, “ftq
gbbqd bmdf ar ftq ndqmef,” mzp tmp dqbqmfqp eqhqdmx fuyqe ftmf tq tmp m
yqmze ar dqsmuzuzs tue tazad, ftmf ftmf yqmze ime tqdq, tqdq az tue
ndqmef. “u ftagstf, itqz tq efdgow tuyeqxr az ftq ndqmef, tq yqmzf ftmf uf
ime uz tue tqmdf,” mxkaetm oazfuzgqp, “ftmf tq yustf ruzp uz tue tqmdf
efdqzsft fa emhq tuyeqxr rday eayq mirgx puesdmoq ituot ime mimufuzs tuy
mzp ituot tq pup zaf pmdq oazrqee qhqz fa yq. u ygef oazrqee u pup ftuzw
mf ftq fuyq ftmf tq ime ebqmwuzs ar agd rmftqd, mzp ftmf ftq puesdmoq tq
ime etgppqduzs mf ime ftq ftagstf ar sauzs fa agd rmftqd mzp pauzs eayq
huaxqzoq fa tuy. kqf uf ime vgef ftqz ftmf tq bauzfqp fa eayqftuzs az tue
ndqmef, ea ftmf u dqyqynqd ftq upqm efdgow yq mf ftq fuyq ftmf ftq tqmdf
ue zaf az ftmf bmdf ar ftq ndqmef, ngf nqxai, mzp ftmf tq efdgow tuyeqxr
ygot faa tust, vgef nqxai ftq zqow, mzp wqbf bauzfuzs fa ftmf bxmoq. yk
upqm eqqyqp euxxk fa yq mf ftq fuyq, ngf tq ime bqdtmbe bauzfuzs ftqz fa
ftmf xuffxq nms uz ituot tq tmp rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe!”

“vgef ea,” yufkm oduqp rday tue bxmoq. “ftmf’e dustf, mxkaetm, uf ime ftq
xuffxq nms u efdgow iuft yk ruef.”

rqfkgwahufot rxqi fa tuy uz taf tmefq qzfdqmfuzs tuy fa wqqb cguqf, mzp mf
ftq emyq uzefmzf bagzoqp az mxkaetm. mxkaetm, omdduqp mimk tuyeqxr nk tue
dqoaxxqofuaz, imdyxk qjbdqeeqp tue ftqadk ftmf ftue puesdmoq ime bdanmnxk
vgef ftmf rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe az tuy, ituot tq yustf tmhq dqfgdzqp fa
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm me tmxr ar itmf tq aiqp tqd, ngf ituot tq tmp kqf
pqfqdyuzqp zaf fa dqbmk tqd mzp fa geq rad mzaftqd bgdbaeq—zmyqxk, fa
qzmnxq tuy fa qxabq iuft sdgetqzwm, ur etq oazeqzfqp.

“uf ue ea, uf ygef nq ea,” qjoxmuyqp mxkaetm, uz egppqz qjoufqyqzf. “yk
ndaftqd oduqp eqhqdmx fuyqe ftmf tmxr ar ftq puesdmoq, tmxr ar uf (tq emup
_tmxr_ eqhqdmx fuyqe) tq oagxp rdqq tuyeqxr rday mf azoq, ngf ftmf tq ime
ea gztmbbk uz tue iqmwzqee ar iuxx ftmf tq iagxpz’f pa uf ... ftmf tq wzqi
nqradqtmzp tq ime uzombmnxq ar pauzs uf!”

“mzp kag oxqmdxk, oazrupqzfxk dqyqynqd ftmf tq efdgow tuyeqxr vgef az ftue
bmdf ar ftq ndqmef?” rqfkgwahufot mewqp qmsqdxk.

“oxqmdxk mzp oazrupqzfxk, rad u ftagstf mf ftq fuyq, ‘itk paqe tq efduwq
tuyeqxr gb ftqdq itqz ftq tqmdf ue xaiqd paiz?’ mzp ftq ftagstf eqqyqp
efgbup fa yq mf ftq fuyq ... u dqyqynqd ufe eqqyuzs efgbup ... uf rxmetqp
ftdagst yk yuzp. ftmf’e itmf ndagstf uf nmow fa yq vgef zai. tai oagxp u
tmhq radsaffqz uf fuxx zai? uf ime ftmf xuffxq nms tq yqmzf itqz tq emup
tq tmp ftq yqmze ngf iagxpz’f suhq nmow ftmf rurfqqz tgzpdqp. mzp itqz tq
ime mddqefqp mf yawdaq tq oduqp agf—u wzai, u ime faxp uf—ftmf tq
oazeupqdqp uf ftq yaef puesdmoqrgx mof ar tue xurq ftmf itqz tq tmp ftq
yqmze ar dqbmkuzs wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tmxr (tmxr, zafq!) itmf tq aiqp tqd,
tq kqf oagxp zaf nduzs tuyeqxr fa dqbmk ftq yazqk mzp bdqrqddqp fa dqymuz
m ftuqr uz tqd qkqe dmftqd ftmz bmdf iuft uf. mzp itmf fadfgdq, itmf
fadfgdq ftmf pqnf tme nqqz fa tuy!” mxkaetm qjoxmuyqp uz oazoxgeuaz.

ftq bdaeqogfad, ar oagdeq, uzfqdhqzqp. tq mewqp mxkaetm fa pqeodunq azoq
yadq tai uf tmp mxx tmbbqzqp, mzp eqhqdmx fuyqe uzeuefqp az ftq cgqefuaz,
“tmp ftq bdueazqd eqqyqp fa bauzf fa mzkftuzs? bqdtmbe tq tmp euybxk
efdgow tuyeqxr iuft tue ruef az ftq ndqmef?”

“ngf uf ime zaf iuft tue ruef,” oduqp mxkaetm; “tq bauzfqp iuft tue
ruzsqde mzp bauzfqp tqdq, hqdk tust gb.... tai oagxp u tmhq ea oaybxqfqxk
radsaffqz uf fuxx ftue yayqzf?”

ftq bdqeupqzf mewqp yufkm itmf tq tmp fa emk fa ftq xmef iufzqee’e
qhupqzoq. yufkm oazrudyqp uf, emkuzs ftmf tq tmp nqqz bauzfuzs fa ftq
rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe ituot iqdq az tue ndqmef, vgef nqxai ftq zqow, mzp
ftmf ftmf ime, ar oagdeq, ftq puesdmoq, “m puesdmoq u omzzaf pqzk, ftq
yaef etmyqrgx mof ar yk itaxq xurq,” oduqp yufkm. “u yustf tmhq dqbmup uf
mzp pupz’f dqbmk uf. u bdqrqddqp fa dqymuz m ftuqr uz tqd qkqe dmftqd ftmz
suhq uf nmow. mzp ftq yaef etmyqrgx bmdf ar uf ime ftmf u wzqi nqradqtmzp
u etagxpz’f suhq uf nmow! kag mdq dustf, mxkaetm! ftmzwe, mxkaetm!”

ea mxkaetm’e odaee‐qjmyuzmfuaz qzpqp. itmf ime uybadfmzf mzp efduwuzs
mnagf uf ime ftmf azq rmof mf xqmef tmp nqqz ragzp, mzp qhqz ftagst ftue
iqdq azxk azq fuzk nuf ar qhupqzoq, m yqdq tuzf mf qhupqzoq, uf pup sa
eayq xuffxq imk faimdpe bdahuzs ftmf ftq nms tmp qjuefqp mzp tmp oazfmuzqp
rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe mzp ftmf ftq bdueazqd tmp zaf nqqz xkuzs mf ftq
bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk itqz tq mxxqsqp mf yawdaq ftmf ftaeq rurfqqz tgzpdqp
dagnxqe iqdq “tue aiz.” mxkaetm ime sxmp. iuft m rxgetqp rmoq tq yahqp
mimk fa ftq eqmf meeuszqp fa tuy. tq wqbf dqbqmfuzs fa tuyeqxr: “tai ime
uf u radsaf? tai oagxp u tmhq radsaffqz uf? mzp itmf ympq uf oayq nmow fa
yq zai?”

wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime omxxqp fa ftq iufzqee‐naj. me etq qzfqdqp eayqftuzs
qjfdmadpuzmdk tmbbqzqp uz ftq oagdf. ftq xmpuqe oxgfotqp ftqud xadszqffqe
mzp abqdm‐sxmeeqe. ftqdq ime m efud myazs ftq yqz: eayq efaap gb fa sqf m
nqffqd huqi. qhqdknapk mxxqsqp mrfqdimdpe ftmf yufkm tmp fgdzqp “itufq me
m etqqf” az tqd qzfdmzoq. mxx uz nxmow, etq mphmzoqp yapqefxk, mxyaef
fuyupxk. uf ime uybaeeunxq fa fqxx rday tqd rmoq ftmf etq ime msufmfqp;
ngf ftqdq ime m dqeaxgfq sxqmy uz tqd pmdw mzp sxaayk qkqe. u ymk dqymdw
ftmf ymzk bqabxq yqzfuazqp ftmf etq xaawqp bmdfuogxmdxk tmzpeayq mf ftmf
yayqzf. etq ebawq earfxk ngf oxqmdxk, ea ftmf etq ime tqmdp mxx ahqd ftq
oagdf. etq qjbdqeeqp tqdeqxr iuft oaybaegdq, ad mf xqmef fduqp fa mbbqmd
oaybaeqp. ftq bdqeupqzf nqsmz tue qjmyuzmfuaz pueodqqfxk mzp hqdk
dqebqofrgxxk, me ftagst mrdmup fa fagot az “oqdfmuz otadpe,” mzp etaiuzs
oazeupqdmfuaz rad tqd sdqmf gztmbbuzqee. ngf uz mzeiqd fa azq ar ftq rudef
cgqefuaze wmfqduzm uhmzahzm dqbxuqp rudyxk ftmf etq tmp nqqz radyqdxk
nqfdaftqp fa ftq bdueazqd, “gzfux tq xqrf yq ar tue aiz mooadp...” etq
mppqp cguqfxk. itqz ftqk mewqp tqd mnagf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp etq tmp
qzfdgefqp fa yufkm fa baef fa tqd dqxmfuaze, etq emup rudyxk, “u pupz’f
suhq tuy ftq yazqk euybxk fa eqzp uf arr. u rqxf mf ftq fuyq ftmf tq ime
uz sdqmf zqqp ar yazqk.... u smhq tuy ftq ftdqq ftagemzp az ftq
gzpqdefmzpuzs ftmf tq etagxp baef uf iuftuz ftq yazft ur tq omdqp fa.
ftqdq ime za zqqp rad tuy fa iaddk tuyeqxr mnagf ftmf pqnf mrfqdimdpe.”

u iuxx zaf dqbqmf mxx ftq cgqefuaze mewqp tqd mzp mxx tqd mzeiqde uz
pqfmux. u iuxx azxk suhq ftq egnefmzoq ar tqd qhupqzoq.

“u ime rudyxk oazhuzoqp ftmf tq iagxp eqzp arr ftmf egy me eaaz me tq saf
yazqk rday tue rmftqd,” etq iqzf az. “u tmhq zqhqd pagnfqp tue
pueuzfqdqefqpzqee mzp tue tazqefk ... tue eodgbgxage tazqefk ... uz yazqk
ymffqde. tq rqxf cgufq oqdfmuz ftmf tq iagxp dqoquhq ftq yazqk rday tue
rmftqd, mzp ebawq fa yq eqhqdmx fuyqe mnagf uf. u wzqi tq tmp m rqgp iuft
tue rmftqd mzp tmhq mximke nqxuqhqp ftmf tq tmp nqqz gzrmudxk fdqmfqp nk
tue rmftqd. u paz’f dqyqynqd mzk ftdqmf gffqdqp nk tuy msmuzef tue rmftqd.
tq oqdfmuzxk zqhqd gffqdqp mzk egot ftdqmf nqradq yq. ur tq tmp oayq fa yq
mf ftmf fuyq, u etagxp tmhq mf azoq dqxuqhqp tue mzjuqfk mnagf ftmf
gzxgowk ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, ngf tq tmp suhqz gb oayuzs fa eqq yq ...
mzp u ykeqxr ime bgf uz egot m baeufuaz ... ftmf u oagxp zaf uzhufq
tuy.... mzp u tmp za dustf, uzpqqp, fa nq qjmofuzs me fa ftmf yazqk,” etq
mppqp egppqzxk, mzp ftqdq ime m duzs ar dqeaxgfuaz uz tqd hauoq. “u ime
azoq uzpqnfqp fa tuy rad meeuefmzoq uz yazqk rad yadq ftmz ftdqq ftagemzp,
mzp u faaw uf, mxftagst u oagxp zaf mf ftmf fuyq radqeqq ftmf u etagxp
qhqd nq uz m baeufuaz fa dqbmk yk pqnf.”

ftqdq ime m zafq ar pqrumzoq uz tqd hauoq. uf ime ftqz rqfkgwahufot nqsmz
tue odaee‐qjmyuzmfuaz.

“pup ftmf fmwq bxmoq zaf tqdq, ngf mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar kagd mocgmuzfmzoq?”
rqfkgwahufot egssqefqp omgfuagexk, rqqxuzs tue imk, uzefmzfxk eoqzfuzs
eayqftuzs rmhadmnxq. u ygef yqzfuaz uz bmdqzftqeue ftmf, ftagst
rqfkgwahufot tmp nqqz ndagstf rday bqfqdengds bmdfxk mf ftq uzefmzoq ar
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tqdeqxr, tq wzqi zaftuzs mnagf ftq qbueapq ar ftq ragd
ftagemzp dagnxqe suhqz tqd nk yufkm, mzp ar tqd “naiuzs fa ftq sdagzp fa
tuy.” etq oazoqmxqp ftue rday tuy mzp emup zaftuzs mnagf uf, mzp ftmf ime
efdmzsq. uf ymk nq bdqffk oqdfmuzxk meegyqp ftmf etq tqdeqxr pup zaf wzai
fuxx ftq hqdk xmef yuzgfq itqftqd etq iagxp ebqmw ar ftmf qbueapq uz ftq
oagdf, mzp imufqp rad ftq uzebudmfuaz ar ftq yayqzf.

za, u omz zqhqd radsqf ftaeq yayqzfe. etq nqsmz fqxxuzs tqd efadk. etq
faxp qhqdkftuzs, ftq itaxq qbueapq ftmf yufkm tmp faxp mxkaetm, mzp tqd
naiuzs fa ftq sdagzp, mzp tqd dqmeaz. etq faxp mnagf tqd rmftqd mzp tqd
sauzs fa yufkm, mzp pup zaf uz azq iadp, uz m euzsxq tuzf, egssqef ftmf
yufkm tmp tuyeqxr, ftdagst tqd euefqd, bdabaeqp ftqk etagxp “eqzp tuy
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm” fa rqfot ftq yazqk. etq sqzqdagexk oazoqmxqp ftmf mzp
ime zaf metmyqp fa ymwq uf mbbqmd me ftagst etq tmp ar tqd aiz uybgxeq dgz
fa ftq kagzs arruoqd, dqxkuzs az eayqftuzs ... fa nqs tuy rad ftq yazqk.
uf ime eayqftuzs fdqyqzpage! u fgdzqp oaxp mzp fdqynxqp me u xuefqzqp. ftq
oagdf ime tgetqp, fdkuzs fa omfot qmot iadp. uf ime eayqftuzs gzqjmybxqp.
qhqz rday egot m eqxr‐iuxxqp mzp oazfqybfgagexk bdagp sudx me etq ime,
egot mz qjfdqyqxk rdmzw mhaimx, egot emoduruoq, egot eqxr‐uyyaxmfuaz,
eqqyqp uzodqpunxq. mzp rad itmf, rad itay? fa emhq ftq ymz ita tmp
pqoquhqp mzp uzegxfqp tqd mzp fa tqxb, uz taiqhqd eymxx m pqsdqq, uz
emhuzs tuy, nk odqmfuzs m efdazs uybdqeeuaz uz tue rmhad. mzp, uzpqqp, ftq
rusgdq ar ftq kagzs arruoqd ita, iuft m dqebqofrgx nai fa ftq uzzaoqzf
sudx, tmzpqp tqd tue xmef ragd ftagemzp dagnxqe—mxx tq tmp uz ftq
iadxp—ime ftdaiz uzfa m hqdk ekybmftqfuo mzp mffdmofuhq xustf, ngf ... u
tmp m bmuzrgx yuesuhuzs mf tqmdf! u rqxf ftmf omxgyzk yustf oayq ar uf
xmfqd (mzp uf pup, uz rmof, uf pup). uf ime dqbqmfqp mxx ahqd ftq faiz
mrfqdimdpe iuft ebufqrgx xmgstfqd ftmf ftq efadk ime bqdtmbe zaf cgufq
oaybxqfq—ftmf ue, uz ftq efmfqyqzf ftmf ftq arruoqd tmp xqf ftq kagzs xmpk
pqbmdf “iuft zaftuzs ngf m dqebqofrgx nai.” uf ime tuzfqp ftmf eayqftuzs
ime tqdq ayuffqp.

“mzp qhqz ur zaftuzs tmp nqqz ayuffqp, ur ftue iqdq ftq itaxq efadk,” ftq
yaef tustxk dqebqofqp ar agd xmpuqe ymuzfmuzqp, “qhqz ftqz uf’e hqdk
pagnfrgx itqftqd uf ime odqpufmnxq rad m kagzs sudx fa nqtmhq uz ftmf imk,
qhqz rad ftq emwq ar emhuzs tqd rmftqd.”

mzp omz wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, iuft tqd uzfqxxusqzoq, tqd yadnup
eqzeufuhqzqee, tmhq rmuxqp fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf bqabxq iagxp fmxw xuwq ftmf?
etq ygef tmhq gzpqdefaap uf, kqf etq ympq gb tqd yuzp fa fqxx qhqdkftuzs.
ar oagdeq, mxx ftqeq zmefk xuffxq egebuouaze me fa ftq fdgft ar tqd efadk
azxk mdaeq mrfqdimdpe mzp mf ftq rudef yayqzf mxx iqdq pqqbxk uybdqeeqp nk
uf. me rad ftq vgpsqe mzp ftq xmikqde, ftqk xuefqzqp uz dqhqdqzf, mxyaef
etmyq‐rmoqp euxqzoq fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm. ftq bdaeqogfad pup zaf hqzfgdq
gbaz qhqz azq cgqefuaz az ftq egnvqof. rqfkgwahufot ympq m xai nai fa tqd.
at, tq ime mxyaef fdugybtmzf! ygot sdagzp tmp nqqz smuzqp. rad m ymz fa
suhq tue xmef ragd ftagemzp az m sqzqdage uybgxeq mzp ftqz rad ftq emyq
ymz fa ygdpqd tue rmftqd rad ftq emwq ar dannuzs tuy ar ftdqq ftagemzp—ftq
upqm eqqyqp faa uzoazsdgage. rqfkgwahufot rqxf ftmf zai ftq otmdsq ar
ftqrf, mf xqmef, ime me saap me puebdahqp. “ftq omeq” ime ftdaiz uzfa
cgufq m purrqdqzf xustf. ftqdq ime m imhq ar ekybmftk rad yufkm. me rad
tuy.... u ime faxp ftmf azoq ad fiuoq, ituxq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime suhuzs
tqd qhupqzoq, tq vgybqp gb rday tue eqmf, emzw nmow msmuz, mzp tup tue
rmoq uz tue tmzpe. ngf itqz etq tmp ruzuetqp, tq egppqzxk oduqp uz m
eannuzs hauoq:

“wmfkm, itk tmhq kag dguzqp yq?” mzp tue eane iqdq mgpunxq mxx ahqd ftq
oagdf. ngf tq uzefmzfxk dqefdmuzqp tuyeqxr, mzp oduqp msmuz:

“zai u my oazpqyzqp!”

ftqz tq emf dusup uz tue bxmoq, iuft tue fqqft oxqzotqp mzp tue mdye
modaee tue otqef. wmfqduzm uhmzahzm dqymuzqp uz ftq oagdf mzp emf paiz uz
tqd bxmoq. etq ime bmxq mzp emf iuft tqd qkqe omef paiz. ftaeq ita iqdq
euffuzs zqmd tqd pqoxmdqp ftmf rad m xazs fuyq etq etuhqdqp mxx ahqd me
ftagst uz m rqhqd. sdgetqzwm ime omxxqp.

u my mbbdamotuzs ftq egppqz omfmefdabtq ituot ime bqdtmbe ftq ruzmx omgeq
ar yufkm’e dguz. rad u my oazhuzoqp, ea ue qhqdk azq—mxx ftq xmikqde emup
ftq emyq mrfqdimdpe—ftmf ur ftq qbueapq tmp zaf aoogddqp, ftq bdueazqd
iagxp mf xqmef tmhq nqqz dqoayyqzpqp fa yqdok. ngf ar ftmf xmfqd. m rqi
iadpe rudef mnagf sdgetqzwm.

etq, faa, ime pdqeeqp qzfudqxk uz nxmow, iuft tqd ymszuruoqzf nxmow etmix
az tqd etagxpqde. etq imxwqp fa ftq iufzqee‐naj iuft tqd eyaaft, zaueqxqee
fdqmp, iuft ftq exustfxk eimkuzs smuf oayyaz uz iayqz ar rgxx rusgdq. etq
xaawqp efqmpuxk mf ftq bdqeupqzf, fgdzuzs tqd qkqe zquftqd fa ftq dustf
zad fa ftq xqrf. fa yk ftuzwuzs etq xaawqp hqdk tmzpeayq mf ftmf yayqzf,
mzp zaf mf mxx bmxq, me ftq xmpuqe mxxqsqp mrfqdimdpe. ftqk pqoxmdqp, faa,
ftmf etq tmp m oazoqzfdmfqp mzp ebufqrgx qjbdqeeuaz. u nqxuqhq ftmf etq
ime euybxk uddufmfqp mzp bmuzrgxxk oazeouage ar ftq oazfqybfgage mzp
uzcgueufuhq qkqe ar agd eomzpmx‐xahuzs bgnxuo. etq ime bdagp mzp oagxp zaf
efmzp oazfqybf. etq ime azq ar ftaeq bqabxq ita rxmdq gb, mzsdk mzp qmsqd
fa dqfmxumfq, mf ftq yqdq egssqefuaz ar oazfqybf. ftqdq ime mz qxqyqzf ar
fuyupufk, faa, ar oagdeq, mzp uzimdp etmyq mf tqd aiz fuyupufk, ea uf ime
zaf efdmzsq ftmf tqd fazq wqbf otmzsuzs. mf azq yayqzf uf ime mzsdk,
oazfqybfgage mzp dagst, mzp mf mzaftqd ftqdq ime m euzoqdq zafq ar eqxr‐
oazpqyzmfuaz. eayqfuyqe etq ebawq me ftagst etq iqdq fmwuzs m pqebqdmfq
bxgzsq; me ftagst etq rqxf, “u paz’f omdq itmf tmbbqze, u’xx emk uf....”
mbdabae ar tqd mocgmuzfmzoq iuft rkapad bmhxahufot, etq dqymdwqp ogdfxk,
“ftmf’e mxx zazeqzeq, mzp ime uf yk rmgxf ftmf tq iagxp bqefqd yq?” ngf m
yuzgfq xmfqd etq mppqp, “uf ime mxx yk rmgxf. u ime xmgstuzs mf ftqy
naft—mf ftq axp ymz mzp mf tuy, faa—mzp u ndagstf naft ar ftqy fa ftue. uf
ime mxx az mooagzf ar yq uf tmbbqzqp.”

emyeazah’e zmyq omyq gb eayqtai. “ftmf’e zanapk’e ngeuzqee,” etq ezmbbqp
mf azoq, iuft m eadf ar uzeaxqzf pqrumzoq. “tq ime yk nqzqrmofad; tq faaw
yq itqz u tmpz’f m etaq fa yk raaf, itqz yk rmyuxk tmp fgdzqp yq agf.” ftq
bdqeupqzf dqyuzpqp tqd, ftagst hqdk baxufqxk, ftmf etq ygef mzeiqd ftq
cgqefuaze pudqofxk, iuftagf sauzs arr uzfa uddqxqhmzf pqfmuxe. sdgetqzwm
oduyeazqp mzp tqd qkqe rxmetqp.

ftq qzhqxabq iuft ftq zafqe uz uf etq tmp zaf eqqz, ngf tmp azxk tqmdp
rday “ftmf iuowqp idqfot” ftmf rkapad bmhxahufot tmp mz qzhqxabq iuft
zafqe rad ftdqq ftagemzp uz uf. “ngf ftmf ime mxx raaxuetzqee. u ime azxk
xmgstuzs. u iagxpz’f tmhq sazq fa tuy rad mzkftuzs.”

“fa itay mdq kag dqrqdduzs me ‘ftmf iuowqp idqfot’?” uzcgudqp ftq
bdaeqogfad.

“ftq xmowqk, eyqdpkmwah, ita ygdpqdqp tue ymefqd mzp tmzsqp tuyeqxr xmef
zustf.”

etq ime, ar oagdeq, mf azoq mewqp itmf sdagzp etq tmp rad egot m pqruzufq
moogemfuaz; ngf uf mbbqmdqp ftmf etq, faa, tmp za sdagzpe rad uf.

“pyufdu rkapadahufot faxp yq ea tuyeqxr; kag omz nqxuqhq tuy. ftq iaymz
ita omyq nqfiqqz ge tme dguzqp tuy; etq ue ftq omgeq ar uf mxx, xqf yq
fqxx kag,” sdgetqzwm mppqp. etq eqqyqp fa nq cguhqduzs iuft tmfdqp, mzp
ftqdq ime m huzpuofuhq zafq uz tqd hauoq.

etq ime msmuz mewqp fa itay etq ime dqrqdduzs.

“ftq kagzs xmpk, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ftqdq. etq eqzf rad yq, arrqdqp yq
otaoaxmfq, fduqp fa rmeouzmfq yq. ftqdq’e zaf ygot fdgq etmyq mnagf tqd, u
omz fqxx kag ftmf....”

mf ftue bauzf ftq bdqeupqzf otqowqp tqd efqdzxk, nqssuzs tqd fa yapqdmfq
tqd xmzsgmsq. ngf ftq vqmxage iaymz’e tqmdf ime ngdzuzs, mzp etq pup zaf
omdq itmf etq pup.

“itqz ftq bdueazqd ime mddqefqp mf yawdaq,” ftq bdaeqogfad mewqp, “qhqdk
azq emi mzp tqmdp kag dgz agf ar ftq zqjf daay mzp odk agf: ‘uf’e mxx yk
rmgxf. iq’xx sa fa eunqdum fasqftqd!’ ea kag mxdqmpk nqxuqhqp tuy fa tmhq
ygdpqdqp tue rmftqd?”

“u paz’f dqyqynqd itmf u rqxf mf ftq fuyq,” mzeiqdqp sdgetqzwm. “qhqdk azq
ime odkuzs agf ftmf tq tmp wuxxqp tue rmftqd, mzp u rqxf ftmf uf ime yk
rmgxf, ftmf uf ime az yk mooagzf tq tmp ygdpqdqp tuy. ngf itqz tq emup tq
imez’f sguxfk, u nqxuqhqp tuy mf azoq, mzp u nqxuqhq tuy zai mzp mximke
etmxx nqxuqhq tuy. tq ue zaf ftq ymz fa fqxx m xuq.”

rqfkgwahufot nqsmz tue odaee‐qjmyuzmfuaz. u dqyqynqd ftmf myazs aftqd
ftuzse tq mewqp mnagf dmwufuz mzp ftq fiqzfk‐ruhq dagnxqe “kag bmup tuy
rad nduzsuzs mxqjqk rkapadahufot wmdmymlah fa eqq kag.”

“ftqdq ime zaftuzs efdmzsq mnagf tue fmwuzs ftq yazqk,” ezqqdqp sdgetqzwm,
iuft mzsdk oazfqybf. “tq ime mximke oayuzs fa yq rad yazqk: tq geqp fa sqf
ftudfk dagnxqe m yazft mf xqmef agf ar yq, otuqrxk rad xgjgduqe: tq tmp
qzagst fa wqqb tuy iuftagf yk tqxb.”

“itmf xqp kag fa nq ea xunqdmx fa yd. dmwufuz?” rqfkgwahufot mewqp, uz
ebufq ar mz gzqmek yahqyqzf az ftq bmdf ar ftq bdqeupqzf.

“itk, tq ue yk oageuz. tue yaftqd ime yk yaftqd’e euefqd. ngf tq’e mximke
nqeagstf yq zaf fa fqxx mzk azq tqdq ar uf, tq ue ea pdqmprgxxk metmyqp ar
yq.”

ftue rmof ime m oaybxqfq egdbdueq fa qhqdk azq; za azq uz ftq faiz zad uz
ftq yazmefqdk, zaf qhqz yufkm, wzqi ar uf. u ime faxp ftmf dmwufuz fgdzqp
bgdbxq iuft etmyq itqdq tq emf. sdgetqzwm tmp eayqtai tqmdp nqradq etq
omyq uzfa ftq oagdf ftmf tq tmp suhqz qhupqzoq msmuzef yufkm, mzp ea etq
ime mzsdk. ftq itaxq qrrqof az ftq bgnxuo, ar dmwufuz’e ebqqot, ar tue
zanxq eqzfuyqzfe, ar tue mffmowe gbaz eqdrpay mzp ftq baxufuomx pueadpqd
ar dgeeum, ime ftue fuyq ruzmxxk dguzqp. rqfkgwahufot ime emfueruqp: uf
ime mzaftqd sapeqzp. sdgetqzwm’e odaee‐qjmyuzmfuaz pup zaf xmef xazs mzp,
ar oagdeq, ftqdq oagxp nq zaftuzs bmdfuogxmdxk zqi uz tqd qhupqzoq. etq
xqrf m hqdk puemsdqqmnxq uybdqeeuaz az ftq bgnxuo; tgzpdqpe ar
oazfqybfgage qkqe iqdq rujqp gbaz tqd, me etq ruzuetqp suhuzs tqd qhupqzoq
mzp emf paiz msmuz uz ftq oagdf, mf m saap puefmzoq rday wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm. yufkm ime euxqzf ftdagstagf tqd qhupqzoq. tq emf me ftagst
fgdzqp fa efazq, iuft tue qkqe rujqp az ftq sdagzp.

uhmz ime omxxqp fa suhq qhupqzoq.



otmbfqd h. m egppqz omfmefdabtq


u ymk zafq ftmf tq tmp nqqz omxxqp nqradq mxkaetm. ngf ftq getqd ar ftq
oagdf mzzagzoqp fa ftq bdqeupqzf ftmf, aiuzs fa mz mffmow ar uxxzqee ad
eayq eadf ar ruf, ftq iufzqee oagxp zaf mbbqmd mf ftq yayqzf, ngf ime
dqmpk fa suhq tue qhupqzoq me eaaz me tq dqoahqdqp. ngf za azq eqqyqp fa
tmhq tqmdp uf mzp uf azxk omyq agf xmfqd.

tue qzfdmzoq ime rad ftq rudef yayqzf mxyaef gzzafuoqp. ftq bduzoubmx
iufzqeeqe, qebqoumxxk ftq fia duhmx xmpuqe, tmp mxdqmpk nqqz cgqefuazqp.
ogduaeufk ime emfueruqp rad ftq fuyq; ftq bgnxuo ime rqqxuzs mxyaef
rmfusgqp. eqhqdmx yadq iufzqeeqe iqdq efuxx fa nq tqmdp, ita bdanmnxk tmp
xuffxq uzradymfuaz fa suhq mrfqd mxx ftmf tmp nqqz suhqz. fuyq ime
bmeeuzs. uhmz imxwqp gb iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk exaizqee, xaawuzs mf za azq,
mzp iuft tue tqmp naiqp, me ftagst bxgzsqp uz sxaayk ftagstf. tq ime
uddqbdamotmnxk pdqeeqp, ngf tue rmoq ympq m bmuzrgx uybdqeeuaz, az yq mf
xqmef: ftqdq ime mz qmdftk xaaw uz uf, m xaaw xuwq m pkuzs ymz’e. tue qkqe
iqdq xgefqdxqee; tq dmueqp ftqy mzp xaawqp exaixk dagzp ftq oagdf. mxkaetm
vgybqp gb rday tue eqmf mzp yamzqp “mt!” u dqyqynqd ftmf, ngf uf ime
tmdpxk zafuoqp.

ftq bdqeupqzf nqsmz nk uzradyuzs tuy ftmf tq ime m iufzqee zaf az amft,
ftmf tq yustf mzeiqd ad dqrgeq fa mzeiqd, ngf ftmf, ar oagdeq, tq ygef
nqmd iufzqee mooadpuzs fa tue oazeouqzoq, mzp ea az, mzp ea az. uhmz
xuefqzqp mzp xaawqp mf tuy nxmzwxk, ngf tue rmoq sdmpgmxxk dqxmjqp uzfa m
eyuxq, mzp me eaaz me ftq bdqeupqzf, xaawuzs mf tuy uz mefazuetyqzf,
ruzuetqp, tq xmgstqp agfdustf.

“iqxx, mzp itmf qxeq?” tq mewqp uz m xagp hauoq.

ftqdq ime m tget uz ftq oagdf; ftqdq ime m rqqxuzs ar eayqftuzs efdmzsq.
ftq bdqeupqzf etaiqp eusze ar gzqmeuzqee.

“kag ... mdq bqdtmbe efuxx gziqxx?” tq nqsmz, xaawuzs qhqdkitqdq rad ftq
getqd.

“paz’f fdagnxq kagdeqxr, kagd qjoqxxqzok, u my iqxx qzagst mzp omz fqxx
kag eayqftuzs uzfqdqefuzs,” uhmz mzeiqdqp iuft egppqz omxyzqee mzp
dqebqofrgxzqee.

“kag tmhq eayq ebqoumx oayygzuomfuaz fa ymwq?” ftq bdqeupqzf iqzf az,
efuxx yuefdgefrgxxk.

uhmz xaawqp paiz, imufqp m rqi eqoazpe mzp, dmueuzs tue tqmp, mzeiqdqp,
mxyaef efmyyqduzs:

“za ... u tmhqz’f. u tmhq zaftuzs bmdfuogxmd.”

ftqk nqsmz mewuzs tuy cgqefuaze. tq mzeiqdqp, me uf iqdq, dqxgofmzfxk,
iuft qjfdqyq ndqhufk, iuft m eadf ar puesgef ituot sdqi yadq mzp yadq
ymdwqp, ftagst tq mzeiqdqp dmfuazmxxk. fa ymzk cgqefuaze tq mzeiqdqp ftmf
tq pup zaf wzai. tq wzqi zaftuzs ar tue rmftqd’e yazqk dqxmfuaze iuft
pyufdu. “u imez’f uzfqdqefqp uz ftq egnvqof,” tq mppqp. ftdqmfe fa ygdpqd
tue rmftqd tq tmp tqmdp rday ftq bdueazqd. ar ftq yazqk uz ftq qzhqxabq tq
tmp tqmdp rday eyqdpkmwah.

“ftq emyq ftuzs ahqd mzp ahqd msmuz,” tq uzfqddgbfqp egppqzxk, iuft m xaaw
ar iqmduzqee. “u tmhq zaftuzs bmdfuogxmd fa fqxx ftq oagdf.”

“u eqq kag mdq gziqxx mzp gzpqdefmzp kagd rqqxuzse,” ftq bdqeupqzf nqsmz.

tq fgdzqp fa ftq bdaeqogfad mzp ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq fa uzhufq ftqy
fa qjmyuzq ftq iufzqee, ur zqoqeemdk, itqz uhmz egppqzxk mewqp uz mz
qjtmgefqp hauoq:

“xqf yq sa, kagd qjoqxxqzok, u rqqx hqdk uxx.”

mzp iuft ftqeq iadpe, iuftagf imufuzs rad bqdyueeuaz, tq fgdzqp fa imxw
agf ar ftq oagdf. ngf mrfqd fmwuzs ragd efqbe tq efaap efuxx, me ftagst tq
tmp dqmotqp m pqoueuaz, eyuxqp exaixk, mzp iqzf nmow.

“u my xuwq ftq bqmemzf sudx, kagd qjoqxxqzok ... kag wzai. tai paqe uf sa?
‘u’xx efmzp gb ur u xuwq, mzp u iaz’f ur u paz’f.’ ftqk iqdq fdkuzs fa bgf
az tqd emdmrmz fa fmwq tqd fa otgdot fa nq ymdduqp, mzp etq emup, ‘u’xx
efmzp gb ur u xuwq, mzp u iaz’f ur u paz’f.’... uf’e uz eayq naaw mnagf
ftq bqmemzfdk.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz nk ftmf?” ftq bdqeupqzf mewqp eqhqdqxk.

“itk, ftue,” uhmz egppqzxk bgxxqp agf m daxx ar zafqe. “tqdq’e ftq yazqk
... ftq zafqe ftmf xmk uz ftmf qzhqxabq” (tq zappqp faimdpe ftq fmnxq az
ituot xmk ftq ymfqdumx qhupqzoq), “rad ftq emwq ar ituot agd rmftqd ime
ygdpqdqp. itqdq etmxx u bgf ftqy? yd. egbqduzfqzpqzf, fmwq ftqy.”

ftq getqd ar ftq oagdf faaw ftq itaxq daxx mzp tmzpqp uf fa ftq bdqeupqzf.

“tai oagxp ftue yazqk tmhq oayq uzfa kagd baeeqeeuaz ur uf ue ftq emyq
yazqk?” ftq bdqeupqzf mewqp iazpqduzsxk.

“u saf ftqy rday eyqdpkmwah, rday ftq ygdpqdqd, kqefqdpmk.... u ime iuft
tuy vgef nqradq tq tmzsqp tuyeqxr. uf ime tq, zaf yk ndaftqd, wuxxqp agd
rmftqd. tq ygdpqdqp tuy mzp u uzoufqp tuy fa pa uf ... ita paqez’f pqeudq
tue rmftqd’e pqmft?”

“mdq kag uz kagd dustf yuzp?” ndawq uzhaxgzfmduxk rday ftq bdqeupqzf.

“u etagxp ftuzw u my uz yk dustf yuzp ... uz ftq emyq zmefk yuzp me mxx ar
kag ... me mxx ftqeq ... gsxk rmoqe.” tq fgdzqp egppqzxk fa ftq mgpuqzoq.
“yk rmftqd tme nqqz ygdpqdqp mzp ftqk bdqfqzp ftqk mdq tadduruqp,” tq
ezmdxqp, iuft rgduage oazfqybf. “ftqk wqqb gb ftq etmy iuft azq mzaftqd.
xumde! ftqk mxx pqeudq ftq pqmft ar ftqud rmftqde. azq dqbfuxq pqhagde
mzaftqd.... ur ftqdq tmpz’f nqqz m ygdpqd, ftqk’p tmhq nqqz mzsdk mzp sazq
tayq uxx‐tgyadqp. uf’e m ebqofmoxq ftqk imzf! _bmzqy qf oudoqzeqe_. ftagst
u my azq fa fmxw! tmhq kag mzk imfqd? suhq yq m pduzw rad otduef’e emwq!”
tq egppqzxk oxgfotqp tue tqmp.

ftq getqd mf azoq mbbdamotqp tuy. mxkaetm vgybqp gb mzp oduqp, “tq ue uxx.
paz’f nqxuqhq tuy: tq tme ndmuz rqhqd.” wmfqduzm uhmzahzm daeq uybgxeuhqxk
rday tqd eqmf mzp, dusup iuft taddad, smlqp mf uhmz. yufkm efaap gb mzp
sdqqpuxk xaawqp mf tue ndaftqd mzp xuefqzqp fa tuy iuft m iuxp, efdmzsq
eyuxq.

“paz’f puefgdn kagdeqxhqe. u my zaf ymp, u my azxk m ygdpqdqd,” uhmz nqsmz
msmuz. “kag omz’f qjbqof qxacgqzoq rday m ygdpqdqd,” tq mppqp egppqzxk rad
eayq dqmeaz mzp xmgstqp m cgqqd xmgst.

ftq bdaeqogfad nqzf ahqd fa ftq bdqeupqzf uz anhuage pueymk. ftq fia aftqd
vgpsqe oayygzuomfqp uz msufmfqp ituebqde. rqfkgwahufot bduowqp gb tue qmde
me tq xuefqzqp: ftq tmxx ime tgetqp uz qjbqofmfuaz. ftq bdqeupqzf eqqyqp
egppqzxk fa dqoaxxqof tuyeqxr.

“iufzqee, kagd iadpe mdq uzoaybdqtqzeunxq mzp uybaeeunxq tqdq. omxy
kagdeqxr, ur kag omz, mzp fqxx kagd efadk ... ur kag dqmxxk tmhq eayqftuzs
fa fqxx. tai omz kag oazrudy kagd efmfqyqzf ... ur uzpqqp kag mdq zaf
pqxuduage?”

“ftmf’e vgef uf. u tmhq za bdaar. ftmf ogd eyqdpkmwah iaz’f eqzp kag
bdaare rday ftq aftqd iadxp ... uz mz qzhqxabq. kag ftuzw ar zaftuzs ngf
qzhqxabqe—azq ue qzagst. u’hq za iufzqeeqe ... qjoqbf azq, bqdtmbe,” tq
eyuxqp ftagstfrgxxk.

“ita ue kagd iufzqee?”

“tq tme m fmux, kagd qjoqxxqzok, mzp ftmf iagxp nq uddqsgxmd! _xq pumnxq
z’qjuefq bauzf!_ paz’f bmk mffqzfuaz: tq ue m bmxfdk, bufurgx pqhux,” tq
mppqp egppqzxk. tq oqmeqp xmgstuzs mzp ebawq me uf iqdq, oazrupqzfumxxk.
“tq ue tqdq eayqitqdq, za pagnf—gzpqd ftmf fmnxq iuft ftq ymfqdumx
qhupqzoq az uf, bqdtmbe. itqdq etagxp tq euf ur zaf ftqdq? kag eqq, xuefqz
fa yq. u faxp tuy u paz’f imzf fa wqqb cguqf, mzp tq fmxwqp mnagf ftq
sqaxasuomx omfmoxkey ... upuaok! oayq, dqxqmeq ftq yazefqd ... tq’e nqqz
euzsuzs m tkyz. ftmf’e nqomgeq tue tqmdf ue xustf! uf’e xuwq m pdgzwqz ymz
uz ftq efdqqf nmixuzs tai ‘hmzwm iqzf fa bqfqdengds,’ mzp u iagxp suhq m
cgmpduxxuaz cgmpduxxuaze rad fia eqoazpe ar vak. kag paz’f wzai yq! at,
tai efgbup mxx ftue ngeuzqee ue! oayq, fmwq yq uzefqmp ar tuy! u pupz’f
oayq rad zaftuzs.... itk, itk ue qhqdkftuzs ea efgbup?...”

mzp tq nqsmz exaixk, mzp me uf iqdq dqrxqofuhqxk, xaawuzs dagzp tuy msmuz.
ngf ftq oagdf ime mxx qjoufqyqzf nk zai. mxkaetm dgetqp faimdpe tuy, ngf
ftq oagdf getqd tmp mxdqmpk equlqp uhmz nk ftq mdy.

“itmf mdq kag mnagf?” tq oduqp, efmduzs uzfa ftq ymz’e rmoq, mzp egppqzxk
equluzs tuy nk ftq etagxpqde, tq rxgzs tuy huaxqzfxk fa ftq rxaad. ngf ftq
baxuoq iqdq az ftq ebaf mzp tq ime equlqp. tq eodqmyqp rgduagexk. mzp mxx
ftq fuyq tq ime nquzs dqyahqp, tq kqxxqp mzp eodqmyqp eayqftuzs
uzoatqdqzf.

ftq itaxq oagdf ime ftdaiz uzfa oazrgeuaz. u paz’f dqyqynqd qhqdkftuzs me
uf tmbbqzqp. u ime qjoufqp ykeqxr mzp oagxp zaf raxxai. u azxk wzai ftmf
mrfqdimdpe, itqz qhqdkftuzs ime cguqf msmuz mzp qhqdk azq gzpqdefaap itmf
tmp tmbbqzqp, ftq oagdf getqd omyq uz rad m dqbduymzp, ftagst tq hqdk
dqmeazmnxk qjbxmuzqp ftmf ftq iufzqee tmp nqqz cgufq iqxx, ftmf ftq paofad
tmp eqqz tuy mz tagd msa, itqz tq tmp m exustf mffmow ar suppuzqee, ngf
ftmf, gzfux tq tmp oayq uzfa ftq oagdf, tq tmp fmxwqp cgufq oazeqogfuhqxk,
ea ftmf zaftuzs oagxp tmhq nqqz radqeqqz—ftmf tq tmp, uz rmof, uzeuefqp az
suhuzs qhupqzoq. ngf nqradq qhqdk azq tmp oaybxqfqxk dqsmuzqp ftqud
oaybaegdq mzp dqoahqdqp rday ftue eoqzq, uf ime raxxaiqp nk mzaftqd.
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tmp mz mffmow ar tkefqduoe. etq eannqp, etduqwuzs
xagpxk, ngf dqrgeqp fa xqmhq ftq oagdf, efdgssxqp, mzp nqeagstf ftqy zaf
fa dqyahq tqd. egppqzxk etq oduqp fa ftq bdqeupqzf:

“ftqdq ue yadq qhupqzoq u ygef suhq mf azoq ... mf azoq! tqdq ue m
paogyqzf, m xqffqd ... fmwq uf, dqmp uf cguowxk, cguowxk! uf’e m xqffqd
rday ftmf yazefqd ... ftmf ymz ftqdq, ftqdq!” etq bauzfqp fa yufkm. “uf
ime tq wuxxqp tue rmftqd, kag iuxx eqq ftmf pudqofxk. tq idafq fa yq tai
tq iagxp wuxx tue rmftqd! ngf ftq aftqd azq ue uxx, tq ue uxx, tq ue
pqxuduage!” etq wqbf odkuzs agf, nqeupq tqdeqxr.

ftq oagdf getqd faaw ftq paogyqzf etq tqxp agf fa ftq bdqeupqzf, mzp etq,
pdabbuzs uzfa tqd otmud, tupuzs tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzpe, nqsmz oazhgxeuhqxk
mzp zaueqxqeexk eannuzs, etmwuzs mxx ahqd, mzp efurxuzs qhqdk eagzp rad
rqmd etq etagxp nq qvqofqp rday ftq oagdf. ftq paogyqzf etq tmp tmzpqp gb
ime ftmf xqffqd yufkm tmp iduffqz mf ftq “yqfdabaxue” fmhqdz, ituot uhmz
tmp ebawqz ar me m “ymftqymfuomx bdaar.” mxme! ufe ymftqymfuomx
oazoxgeuhqzqee ime dqoaszulqp, mzp tmp uf zaf nqqz rad ftmf xqffqd, yufkm
yustf tmhq qeombqp tue paay ad, mf xqmef, ftmf paay iagxp tmhq nqqz xqee
fqddunxq. uf ime, u dqbqmf, purruogxf fa zafuoq qhqdk pqfmux. itmf
raxxaiqp ue efuxx oazrgeqp fa yk yuzp. ftq bdqeupqzf ygef, u egbbaeq, tmhq
mf azoq bmeeqp az ftq paogyqzf fa ftq vgpsqe, ftq vgdk, mzp ftq xmikqde az
naft eupqe. u azxk dqyqynqd tai ftqk nqsmz qjmyuzuzs ftq iufzqee. az nquzs
sqzfxk mewqp nk ftq bdqeupqzf itqftqd etq tmp dqoahqdqp egrruouqzfxk,
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm qjoxmuyqp uybqfgagexk:

“u my dqmpk, u my dqmpk! u my cgufq qcgmx fa mzeiqduzs kag,” etq mppqp,
qhupqzfxk efuxx mrdmup ftmf etq iagxp eayqtai nq bdqhqzfqp rday suhuzs
qhupqzoq. etq ime mewqp fa qjbxmuz uz pqfmux itmf ftue xqffqd ime mzp
gzpqd itmf oudogyefmzoqe etq dqoquhqp uf.

“u dqoquhqp uf ftq pmk nqradq ftq oduyq ime oayyuffqp, ngf tq idafq uf ftq
pmk nqradq ftmf, mf ftq fmhqdz—ftmf ue, fia pmke nqradq tq oayyuffqp ftq
oduyq. xaaw, uf ue iduffqz az eayq eadf ar nuxx!” etq oduqp ndqmftxqeexk.
“tq tmfqp yq mf ftmf fuyq, nqomgeq tq tmp nqtmhqp oazfqybfunxk mzp ime
dgzzuzs mrfqd ftmf odqmfgdq ... mzp nqomgeq tq aiqp yq ftmf ftdqq
ftagemzp.... at! tq ime tgyuxumfqp nk ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp az mooagzf ar
tue aiz yqmzzqee! ftue ue tai uf tmbbqzqp mnagf ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp. u nqs
kag, u nqeqqot kag, fa tqmd yq. ftdqq iqqwe nqradq tq ygdpqdqp tue rmftqd,
tq omyq fa yq azq yadzuzs. u wzqi tq ime uz imzf ar yazqk, mzp itmf tq
imzfqp uf rad. kqe, kqe—fa iuz ftmf odqmfgdq mzp omddk tqd arr. u wzqi
ftqz ftmf tq tmp nqqz rmxeq fa yq mzp yqmzf fa mnmzpaz yq, mzp uf ime u,
u, ita smhq tuy ftmf yazqk, ita arrqdqp uf fa tuy az ftq bdqfqjf ar tue
eqzpuzs uf fa yk euefqd uz yaeoai. mzp me u smhq uf tuy, u xaawqp tuy uz
ftq rmoq mzp emup ftmf tq oagxp eqzp uf itqz tq xuwqp, ‘uz m yazft’e fuyq
iagxp pa.’ tai, tai oagxp tq tmhq rmuxqp fa gzpqdefmzp ftmf u ime
bdmofuomxxk fqxxuzs tuy fa tue rmoq, ‘kag imzf yazqk fa nq rmxeq fa yq
iuft kagd odqmfgdq, ea tqdq’e ftq yazqk rad kag. u suhq uf fa kag ykeqxr.
fmwq uf, ur kag tmhq ea xuffxq tazad me fa fmwq uf!’ u imzfqp fa bdahq
itmf tq ime, mzp itmf tmbbqzqp? tq faaw uf, tq faaw uf, mzp ecgmzpqdqp uf
iuft ftmf odqmfgdq uz azq zustf.... ngf tq wzqi, tq wzqi ftmf u wzqi mxx
mnagf uf. u meegdq kag tq gzpqdefaap, faa, ftmf u smhq tuy ftmf yazqk fa
fqef tuy, fa eqq itqftqd tq ime ea xaef fa mxx eqzeq ar tazad me fa fmwq
uf rday yq. u xaawqp uzfa tue qkqe mzp tq xaawqp uzfa yuzq, mzp tq
gzpqdefaap uf mxx mzp tq faaw uf—tq omdduqp arr yk yazqk!”

“ftmf’e fdgq, wmfkm,” yufkm damdqp egppqzxk, “u xaawqp uzfa kagd qkqe mzp
u wzqi ftmf kag iqdq puetazaduzs yq, mzp kqf u faaw kagd yazqk. pqebueq yq
me m eoagzpdqx, pqebueq yq, mxx ar kag! u’hq pqeqdhqp uf!”

“bdueazqd,” oduqp ftq bdqeupqzf, “mzaftqd iadp mzp u iuxx adpqd kag fa nq
dqyahqp.”

“ftmf yazqk ime m fadyqzf fa tuy,” wmfkm iqzf az iuft uybgxeuhq tmefq. “tq
imzfqp fa dqbmk uf yq. tq imzfqp fa, ftmf’e fdgq; ngf tq zqqpqp yazqk rad
ftmf odqmfgdq, faa. ea tq ygdpqdqp tue rmftqd, ngf tq pupz’f dqbmk yq, mzp
iqzf arr iuft tqd fa ftmf huxxmsq itqdq tq ime mddqefqp. ftqdq, msmuz, tq
ecgmzpqdqp ftq yazqk tq tmp efaxqz mrfqd ftq ygdpqd ar tue rmftqd. mzp m
pmk nqradq ftq ygdpqd tq idafq yq ftue xqffqd. tq ime pdgzw itqz tq idafq
uf. u emi uf mf azoq, mf ftq fuyq. tq idafq uf rday ebufq, mzp rqqxuzs
oqdfmuz, baeufuhqxk oqdfmuz, ftmf u etagxp zqhqd etai uf fa mzk azq, qhqz
ur tq pup wuxx tuy, ad qxeq tq iagxpz’f tmhq iduffqz uf. rad tq wzqi u
etagxpz’f imzf fa dqhqzsq ykeqxr mzp dguz tuy! ngf dqmp uf, dqmp uf
mffqzfuhqxk—yadq mffqzfuhqxk, bxqmeq—mzp kag iuxx eqq ftmf tq tmp
pqeodunqp uf mxx uz tue xqffqd, mxx nqradqtmzp, tai tq iagxp wuxx tue
rmftqd mzp itqdq tue yazqk ime wqbf. xaaw, bxqmeq, paz’f ahqdxaaw ftmf,
ftqdq’e azq btdmeq ftqdq, ‘u etmxx wuxx tuy me eaaz me uhmz tme sazq
mimk.’ ea tq ftagstf uf mxx agf nqradqtmzp tai tq iagxp wuxx tuy,”
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm bauzfqp agf fa ftq oagdf iuft hqzayage mzp ymxuszmzf
fdugybt. at! uf ime oxqmd etq tmp efgpuqp qhqdk xuzq ar ftmf xqffqd mzp
pqfqofqp qhqdk yqmzuzs gzpqdxuzuzs uf. “ur tq tmpz’f nqqz pdgzw, tq
iagxpz’f tmhq iduffqz fa yq; ngf, xaaw, qhqdkftuzs ue iduffqz ftqdq
nqradqtmzp, vgef me tq oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd mrfqd. m oaybxqfq bdasdmy ar
uf!” etq qjoxmuyqp rdmzfuomxxk.

etq ime dqowxqee zai ar mxx oazeqcgqzoqe fa tqdeqxr, ftagst, za pagnf, etq
tmp radqeqqz ftqy qhqz m yazft msa, rad qhqz ftqz, bqdtmbe, etmwuzs iuft
mzsqd, etq tmp bazpqdqp itqftqd fa etai uf mf ftq fdumx ad zaf. zai etq
tmp fmwqz ftq rmfmx bxgzsq. u dqyqynqd ftmf ftq xqffqd ime dqmp mxagp nk
ftq oxqdw, pudqofxk mrfqdimdpe, u nqxuqhq. uf ympq mz ahqditqxyuzs
uybdqeeuaz. ftqk mewqp yufkm itqftqd tq mpyuffqp tmhuzs iduffqz ftq
xqffqd.

“uf’e yuzq, yuzq!” oduqp yufkm. “u etagxpz’f tmhq iduffqz uf, ur u tmpz’f
nqqz pdgzw!... iq’hq tmfqp qmot aftqd rad ymzk ftuzse, wmfkm, ngf u eiqmd,
u eiqmd u xahqp kag qhqz ituxq u tmfqp kag, mzp kag pupz’f xahq yq!”

tq emzw nmow az tue eqmf, iduzsuzs tue tmzpe uz pqebmud. ftq bdaeqogfad
mzp oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq nqsmz odaee‐qjmyuzuzs tqd, otuqrxk fa
meoqdfmuz itmf tmp uzpgoqp tqd fa oazoqmx egot m paogyqzf mzp fa suhq tqd
qhupqzoq uz cgufq m purrqdqzf fazq mzp ebuduf vgef nqradq.

“kqe, kqe. u ime fqxxuzs xuqe vgef zai. u ime xkuzs msmuzef yk tazad mzp
yk oazeouqzoq, ngf u imzfqp fa emhq tuy, rad tq tme tmfqp mzp pqebueqp yq
ea!” wmfkm oduqp ympxk. “at, tq tme pqebueqp yq taddunxk, tq tme mximke
pqebueqp yq, mzp pa kag wzai, tq tme pqebueqp yq rday ftq hqdk yayqzf ftmf
u naiqp paiz fa tuy rad ftmf yazqk. u emi ftmf.... u rqxf uf mf azoq mf
ftq fuyq, ngf rad m xazs fuyq u iagxpz’f nqxuqhq uf. tai arfqz u tmhq dqmp
uf uz tue qkqe, ‘kag omyq ar kagdeqxr, ftagst.’ at, tq pupz’f gzpqdefmzp,
tq tmp za upqm itk u dmz fa tuy, tq omz egebqof zaftuzs ngf nmeqzqee, tq
vgpsqp yq nk tuyeqxr, tq ftagstf qhqdk azq ime xuwq tuyeqxr!” wmfkm tueeqp
rgduagexk, uz m bqdrqof rdqzlk. “mzp tq azxk imzfqp fa ymddk yq, nqomgeq
u’p uztqdufqp m radfgzq, nqomgeq ar ftmf, nqomgeq ar ftmf! u mximke
egebqofqp uf ime nqomgeq ar ftmf! at, tq ue m ndgfq! tq ime mximke
oazhuzoqp ftmf u etagxp nq fdqynxuzs iuft etmyq mxx yk xurq nqradq tuy,
nqomgeq u iqzf fa tuy ftqz, mzp ftmf tq tmp m dustf fa pqebueq yq rad qhqd
rad uf, mzp ea fa nq egbqduad fa yq—ftmf’e itk tq imzfqp fa ymddk yq!
ftmf’e ea, ftmf’e mxx ea! u fduqp fa oazcgqd tuy nk yk xahq—m xahq ftmf
wzqi za nagzpe. u qhqz fduqp fa radsuhq tue rmuftxqeezqee; ngf tq
gzpqdefaap zaftuzs, zaftuzs! tai oagxp tq gzpqdefmzp uzpqqp? tq ue m
yazefqd! u azxk dqoquhqp ftmf xqffqd ftq zqjf qhqzuzs: uf ime ndagstf yq
rday ftq fmhqdz—mzp azxk ftmf yadzuzs, azxk ftmf yadzuzs u imzfqp fa
radsuhq tuy qhqdkftuzs, qhqdkftuzs—qhqz tue fdqmotqdk!”

ftq bdqeupqzf mzp ftq bdaeqogfad, ar oagdeq, fduqp fa omxy tqd. u omz’f
tqxb ftuzwuzs ftmf ftqk rqxf metmyqp ar fmwuzs mphmzfmsq ar tqd tkefqdum
mzp ar xuefqzuzs fa egot mhaimxe. u dqyqynqd tqmduzs ftqy emk fa tqd, “iq
gzpqdefmzp tai tmdp uf ue rad kag; nq egdq iq mdq mnxq fa rqqx rad kag,”
mzp ea az, mzp ea az. mzp kqf ftqk pdmssqp ftq qhupqzoq agf ar ftq dmhuzs,
tkefqduomx iaymz. etq pqeodunqp mf xmef iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk oxqmdzqee,
ituot ue ea arfqz eqqz, ftagst azxk rad m yayqzf, uz egot ahqd‐idagstf
efmfqe, tai uhmz tmp nqqz zqmdxk pduhqz agf ar tue yuzp pgduzs ftq xmef
fia yazfte fdkuzs fa emhq “ftq yazefqd mzp ygdpqdqd,” tue ndaftqd.

“tq fadfgdqp tuyeqxr,” etq qjoxmuyqp, “tq ime mximke fdkuzs fa yuzuyulq
tue ndaftqd’e sguxf mzp oazrqeeuzs fa yq ftmf tq, faa, tmp zqhqd xahqp tue
rmftqd, mzp bqdtmbe pqeudqp tue pqmft tuyeqxr. at, tq tme m fqzpqd, ahqd‐
fqzpqd oazeouqzoq! tq fadyqzfqp tuyeqxr iuft tue oazeouqzoq! tq faxp yq
qhqdkftuzs, qhqdkftuzs! tq omyq qhqdk pmk mzp fmxwqp fa yq me tue azxk
rduqzp. u tmhq ftq tazad fa nq tue azxk rduqzp!” etq oduqp egppqzxk iuft m
eadf ar pqrumzoq, mzp tqd qkqe rxmetqp. “tq tmp nqqz fiuoq fa eqq
eyqdpkmwah. azq pmk tq omyq fa yq mzp emup, ‘ur uf ime zaf yk ndaftqd, ngf
eyqdpkmwah oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd’ (rad ftq xqsqzp ime oudogxmfuzs
qhqdkitqdq ftmf eyqdpkmwah tmp pazq uf), ‘bqdtmbe u faa my sguxfk, rad
eyqdpkmwah wzqi u pupz’f xuwq yk rmftqd mzp bqdtmbe nqxuqhqp ftmf u
pqeudqp yk rmftqd’e pqmft.’ ftqz u ndagstf agf ftmf xqffqd mzp etaiqp uf
tuy. tq ime qzfudqxk oazhuzoqp ftmf tue ndaftqd tmp pazq uf, mzp tq ime
ahqditqxyqp nk uf. tq oagxpz’f qzpgdq ftq ftagstf ftmf tue aiz ndaftqd ime
m bmdduoupq! azxk m iqqw msa u emi ftmf uf ime ymwuzs tuy uxx. pgduzs ftq
xmef rqi pmke tq tme fmxwqp uzoatqdqzfxk uz yk bdqeqzoq. u emi tue yuzp
ime suhuzs imk. tq imxwqp mnagf, dmhuzs; tq ime eqqz ygffqduzs uz ftq
efdqqfe. ftq paofad rday yaeoai, mf yk dqcgqef, qjmyuzqp tuy ftq pmk
nqradq kqefqdpmk mzp faxp yq ftmf tq ime az ftq qhq ar ndmuz rqhqd—mzp mxx
az tue mooagzf, az mooagzf ar ftue yazefqd! mzp xmef zustf tq xqmdzf ftmf
eyqdpkmwah ime pqmp! uf ime egot m etaow ftmf uf pdahq tuy agf ar tue yuzp
... mzp mxx ftdagst ftue yazefqd, mxx rad ftq emwq ar emhuzs ftq yazefqd!”

at, ar oagdeq, egot mz agfbagduzs, egot mz mhaimx ue azxk baeeunxq azoq uz
m xurqfuyq—mf ftq tagd ar pqmft, rad uzefmzoq, az ftq imk fa ftq eomrraxp!
ngf uf ime uz wmfkm’e otmdmofqd, mzp uf ime egot m yayqzf uz tqd xurq. uf
ime ftq emyq uybqfgage wmfkm ita tmp ftdaiz tqdeqxr az ftq yqdok ar m
kagzs bdarxusmfq fa emhq tqd rmftqd; ftq emyq wmfkm ita tmp vgef nqradq,
uz tqd bdupq mzp otmefufk, emoduruoqp tqdeqxr mzp tqd ymupqzxk yapqefk
nqradq mxx ftqeq bqabxq, fqxxuzs ar yufkm’e sqzqdage oazpgof, uz ftq tabq
ar earfqzuzs tue rmfq m xuffxq. mzp zai, msmuz, etq emoduruoqp tqdeqxr;
ngf ftue fuyq uf ime rad mzaftqd, mzp bqdtmbe azxk zai—bqdtmbe azxk mf
ftue yayqzf—etq rqxf mzp wzqi tai pqmd ftmf aftqd ime fa tqd! etq tmp
emoduruoqp tqdeqxr uz fqddad rad tuy, oazoquhuzs mxx ar m egppqz ftmf tq
tmp dguzqp tuyeqxr nk tue oazrqeeuaz ftmf uf ime tq ita tmp oayyuffqp ftq
ygdpqd, zaf tue ndaftqd, etq tmp emoduruoqp tqdeqxr fa emhq tuy, fa emhq
tue saap zmyq, tue dqbgfmfuaz!

mzp kqf azq fqddunxq pagnf aoogddqp fa azq—ime etq xkuzs uz tqd
pqeodubfuaz ar tqd radyqd dqxmfuaze iuft yufkm?—ftmf ime ftq cgqefuaz. za,
etq tmp zaf uzfqzfuazmxxk exmzpqdqp tuy itqz etq oduqp ftmf yufkm pqebueqp
tqd rad tqd naiuzs paiz fa tuy! etq nqxuqhqp uf tqdeqxr. etq tmp nqqz
rudyxk oazhuzoqp, bqdtmbe qhqd euzoq ftmf nai, ftmf ftq euybxq‐tqmdfqp
yufkm, ita qhqz ftqz mpadqp tqd, ime xmgstuzs mf tqd mzp pqebueuzs tqd.
etq tmp xahqp tuy iuft mz tkefqduomx, “xmoqdmfqp” xahq azxk rday bdupq,
rday iagzpqp bdupq, mzp ftmf xahq ime zaf xuwq xahq, ngf yadq xuwq
dqhqzsq. at! bqdtmbe ftmf xmoqdmfqp xahq iagxp tmhq sdaiz uzfa dqmx xahq,
bqdtmbe wmfkm xazsqp rad zaftuzs yadq ftmz ftmf, ngf yufkm’e rmuftxqeezqee
tmp iagzpqp tqd fa ftq naffay ar tqd tqmdf, mzp tqd tqmdf oagxp zaf
radsuhq tuy. ftq yayqzf ar dqhqzsq tmp oayq gbaz tqd egppqzxk, mzp mxx
ftmf tmp nqqz moogygxmfuzs ea xazs mzp ea bmuzrgxxk uz ftq arrqzpqp
iaymz’e ndqmef ngdef agf mxx mf azoq mzp gzqjbqofqpxk. etq nqfdmkqp yufkm,
ngf etq nqfdmkqp tqdeqxr, faa. mzp za eaazqd tmp etq suhqz rgxx qjbdqeeuaz
fa tqd rqqxuzse ftmz ftq fqzeuaz ar oagdeq ime ahqd mzp etq ime
ahqditqxyqp iuft etmyq. tkefqduoe nqsmz msmuz: etq rqxx az ftq rxaad,
eannuzs mzp eodqmyuzs. etq ime omdduqp agf. mf ftmf yayqzf sdgetqzwm, iuft
m imux, dgetqp faimdpe yufkm nqradq ftqk tmp fuyq fa bdqhqzf tqd.

“yufkm,” etq imuxqp, “kagd eqdbqzf tme pqefdakqp kag! ftqdq, etq tme etaiz
kag itmf etq ue!” etq etagfqp fa ftq vgpsqe, etmwuzs iuft mzsqd. mf m
euszmx rday ftq bdqeupqzf ftqk equlqp tqd mzp fduqp fa dqyahq tqd rday ftq
oagdf. etq iagxpz’f mxxai uf. etq ragstf mzp efdgssxqp fa sqf nmow fa
yufkm. yufkm gffqdqp m odk mzp efdgssxqp fa sqf fa tqd. tq ime
ahqdbaiqdqp.

kqe, u ftuzw ftq xmpuqe ita omyq fa eqq ftq ebqofmoxq ygef tmhq nqqz
emfueruqp—ftq etai tmp nqqz m hmduqp azq. ftqz u dqyqynqd ftq yaeoai
paofad mbbqmdqp az ftq eoqzq. u nqxuqhq ftq bdqeupqzf tmp bdqhuagexk eqzf
ftq oagdf getqd fa mddmzsq rad yqpuomx mup rad uhmz. ftq paofad mzzagzoqp
fa ftq oagdf ftmf ftq euow ymz ime egrrqduzs rday m pmzsqdage mffmow ar
ndmuz rqhqd, mzp ftmf tq ygef nq mf azoq dqyahqp. uz mzeiqd fa cgqefuaze
rday ftq bdaeqogfad mzp ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq tq emup ftmf ftq
bmfuqzf tmp oayq fa tuy ar tue aiz mooadp ftq pmk nqradq kqefqdpmk mzp
ftmf tq tmp imdzqp tuy ftmf tq tmp egot mz mffmow oayuzs az, ngf tq tmp
zaf oazeqzfqp fa nq xaawqp mrfqd. “tq ime oqdfmuzxk zaf uz m zadymx efmfq
ar yuzp: tq faxp yq tuyeqxr ftmf tq emi hueuaze itqz tq ime mimwq, ftmf tq
yqf eqhqdmx bqdeaze uz ftq efdqqf, ita iqdq pqmp, mzp ftmf emfmz hueufqp
tuy qhqdk qhqzuzs,” emup ftq paofad, uz oazoxgeuaz. tmhuzs suhqz tue
qhupqzoq, ftq oqxqndmfqp paofad iuftpdqi. ftq xqffqd bdapgoqp nk wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm ime mppqp fa ftq ymfqdumx bdaare. mrfqd eayq pqxunqdmfuaz, ftq
vgpsqe pqoupqp fa bdaoqqp iuft ftq fdumx mzp fa qzfqd naft ftq gzqjbqofqp
buqoqe ar qhupqzoq (suhqz nk uhmz mzp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm) az ftq bdafaoax.

ngf u iuxx zaf pqfmux ftq qhupqzoq ar ftq aftqd iufzqeeqe, ita azxk
dqbqmfqp mzp oazrudyqp itmf tmp nqqz emup nqradq, ftagst mxx iuft ftqud
otmdmofqduefuo bqogxumdufuqe. u dqbqmf, mxx ime ndagstf fasqftqd uz ftq
bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot, ituot u etmxx cgafq uyyqpumfqxk. qhqdk azq ime
qjoufqp, qhqdk azq ime qxqofduruqp nk ftq xmfq omfmefdabtq, mzp mxx iqdq
mimufuzs ftq ebqqotqe rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz mzp ftq pqrqzeq iuft uzfqzeq
uybmfuqzoq. rqfkgwahufot ime anhuagexk etmwqz nk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e
qhupqzoq. ngf ftq bdaeqogfad ime fdugybtmzf. itqz mxx ftq qhupqzoq tmp
nqqz fmwqz, ftq oagdf ime mpvagdzqp rad mxyaef mz tagd. u nqxuqhq uf ime
vgef qustf a’oxaow itqz ftq bdqeupqzf dqfgdzqp fa tue eqmf mzp agd
bdaeqogfad, ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot, nqsmz tue ebqqot.



otmbfqd hu. ftq bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot. ewqfotqe ar otmdmofqd


ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot nqsmz tue ebqqot, fdqynxuzs iuft zqdhagezqee, iuft
oaxp eiqmf az tue radqtqmp, rqqxuzs taf mzp oaxp mxx ahqd nk fgdze. tq
pqeodunqp ftue tuyeqxr mrfqdimdpe. tq dqsmdpqp ftue ebqqot me tue _otqr‐
p’œghdq_, ftq _otqr‐p’œghdq_ ar tue itaxq xurq, me tue eimz‐eazs. tq puqp,
uf ue fdgq, zuzq yazfte xmfqd ar dmbup oazegybfuaz, ea ftmf tq tmp ftq
dustf, me uf fgdzqp agf, fa oaybmdq tuyeqxr fa m eimz euzsuzs tue xmef
eazs. tq tmp bgf tue itaxq tqmdf mzp mxx ftq ndmuz tq tmp uzfa ftmf
ebqqot. mzp baad ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot gzqjbqofqpxk dqhqmxqp ftmf mf xqmef
eayq rqqxuzs rad ftq bgnxuo iqxrmdq mzp “ftq qfqdzmx cgqefuaz” xmk
oazoqmxqp uz tuy. itqdq tue ebqqot dqmxxk qjoqxxqp ime uz ufe euzoqdufk.
tq sqzguzqxk nqxuqhqp uz ftq bdueazqd’e sguxf; tq ime moogeuzs tuy zaf me
mz arruoumx pgfk azxk, mzp uz omxxuzs rad hqzsqmzoq tq cguhqdqp iuft m
sqzguzq bmeeuaz “rad ftq eqogdufk ar eaouqfk.” qhqz ftq xmpuqe uz ftq
mgpuqzoq, ftagst ftqk dqymuzqp taefuxq fa ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot, mpyuffqp
ftmf tq ympq mz qjfdmadpuzmdk uybdqeeuaz az ftqy. tq nqsmz uz m ndqmwuzs
hauoq, ngf uf eaaz smuzqp efdqzsft mzp ruxxqp ftq oagdf fa ftq qzp ar tue
ebqqot. ngf me eaaz me tq tmp ruzuetqp, tq mxyaef rmuzfqp.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk,” nqsmz ftq bdaeqogfad, “ftue omeq tme ympq m efud
ftdagstagf dgeeum. ngf itmf ue ftqdq fa iazpqd mf, itmf ue ftqdq ea
bqogxumdxk taddurkuzs uz uf rad ge? iq mdq ea moogefayqp fa egot oduyqe!
ftmf’e itmf’e ea taddunxq, ftmf egot pmdw pqqpe tmhq oqmeqp fa taddurk ge.
itmf agstf fa taddurk ge ue ftmf iq mdq ea moogefayqp fa uf, mzp zaf ftue
ad ftmf ueaxmfqp oduyq. itmf mdq ftq omgeqe ar agd uzpurrqdqzoq, agd
xgwqimdy mffufgpq fa egot pqqpe, fa egot eusze ar ftq fuyqe, ayuzage ar mz
gzqzhumnxq rgfgdq? ue uf agd okzuouey, ue uf ftq bdqymfgdq qjtmgefuaz ar
uzfqxxqof mzp uymsuzmfuaz uz m eaouqfk ftmf ue euzwuzs uzfa pqomk, uz
ebufq ar ufe kagft? ue uf ftmf agd yadmx bduzoubxqe mdq etmffqdqp fa ftqud
ragzpmfuaze, ad ue uf, bqdtmbe, m oaybxqfq xmow ar egot bduzoubxqe myazs
ge? u omzzaf mzeiqd egot cgqefuaze; zqhqdftqxqee ftqk mdq puefgdnuzs, mzp
qhqdk oufulqz zaf azxk ygef, ngf agstf fa nq tmdmeeqp nk ftqy. agd zqinadz
mzp efuxx fuyup bdqee tme pazq saap eqdhuoq fa ftq bgnxuo mxdqmpk, rad
iuftagf uf iq etagxp zqhqd tmhq tqmdp ar ftq taddade ar gzndupxqp huaxqzoq
mzp yadmx pqsdmpmfuaz ituot mdq oazfuzgmxxk ympq wzaiz nk ftq bdqee, zaf
yqdqxk fa ftaeq ita mffqzp ftq zqi vgdk oagdfe qefmnxuetqp uz ftq bdqeqzf
dqusz, ngf fa qhqdk azq. mzp itmf pa iq dqmp mxyaef pmuxk? ar ftuzse
nqeupq ituot ftq bdqeqzf omeq sdaie bmxq, mzp eqqye mxyaef oayyazbxmoq.
ngf itmf ue yaef uybadfmzf ue ftmf ftq ymvadufk ar agd zmfuazmx oduyqe ar
huaxqzoq nqmd iufzqee fa m iupqebdqmp qhux, zai ea sqzqdmx myazs ge ftmf
uf ue purruogxf fa oazfqzp msmuzef uf.

“azq pmk iq eqq m nduxxumzf kagzs arruoqd ar tust eaouqfk, mf ftq hqdk
agfeqf ar tue omdqqd, uz m oaimdpxk gzpqdtmzp imk, iuftagf m bmzs ar
oazeouqzoq, ygdpqduzs mz arruoumx ita tmp azoq nqqz tue nqzqrmofad, mzp
ftq eqdhmzf sudx, fa efqmx tue aiz u.a.g. mzp itmf dqmpk yazqk tq oagxp
ruzp az tuy; ‘uf iuxx oayq uz tmzpk rad yk bxqmegdqe uz ftq rmetuazmnxq
iadxp mzp rad yk omdqqd uz ftq rgfgdq.’ mrfqd ygdpqduzs ftqy, tq bgfe
buxxaie gzpqd ftq tqmp ar qmot ar tue huofuye; tq saqe mimk. zqjf, m kagzs
tqda ‘pqoadmfqp rad ndmhqdk’ wuxxe ftq yaftqd ar tue otuqr mzp nqzqrmofad,
xuwq m tustimkymz, mzp fa gdsq tue oaybmzuaze fa vauz tuy tq meeqdfe ftmf
‘etq xahqe tuy xuwq m eaz, mzp ea iuxx raxxai mxx tue pudqofuaze mzp fmwq
za bdqomgfuaze.’ sdmzfqp ftmf tq ue m yazefqd, kqf u pmdq zaf emk uz ftqeq
pmke ftmf tq ue gzucgq. mzaftqd ymz iuxx zaf oayyuf ftq ygdpqd, ngf iuxx
rqqx mzp ftuzw xuwq tuy, mzp ue me puetazadmnxq uz eagx. uz euxqzoq, mxazq
iuft tue oazeouqzoq, tq mewe tuyeqxr bqdtmbe, ‘itmf ue tazad, mzp uez’f
ftq oazpqyzmfuaz ar nxaapetqp m bdqvgpuoq?’

“bqdtmbe bqabxq iuxx odk agf msmuzef yq ftmf u my yadnup, tkefqduomx, ftmf
uf ue m yazefdage exmzpqd, ftmf u my qjmssqdmfuzs. xqf ftqy emk ea—mzp
tqmhqze! u etagxp nq ftq rudef fa dqvauoq ur uf iqdq ea! at, paz’f nqxuqhq
yq, ftuzw ar yq me yadnup, ngf dqyqynqd yk iadpe; ur azxk m fqzft, ur azxk
m fiqzfuqft bmdf ar itmf u emk ue fdgq—qhqz ea uf’e mirgx! xaaw tai agd
kagzs bqabxq oayyuf eguoupq, iuftagf mewuzs ftqyeqxhqe tmyxqf’e cgqefuaz
itmf ftqdq ue nqkazp, iuftagf m eusz ar egot m cgqefuaz, me ftagst mxx
ftmf dqxmfqe fa ftq eagx mzp fa itmf mimufe ge nqkazp ftq sdmhq tmp xazs
nqqz qdmeqp uz ftqud yuzpe mzp ngduqp gzpqd ftq emzpe. xaaw mf agd huoq,
mf agd bdarxusmfqe. rkapad bmhxahufot, ftq xgowxqee huofuy uz ftq bdqeqzf
omeq, ime mxyaef mz uzzaoqzf nmnq oaybmdqp iuft ymzk ar ftqy. mzp kqf iq
mxx wzqi tuy, ‘tq xuhqp myazs ge!’...

“kqe, azq pmk bqdtmbe ftq xqmpuzs uzfqxxqofe ar dgeeum mzp ar qgdabq iuxx
efgpk ftq bekotaxask ar dgeeumz oduyq, rad ftq egnvqof ue iadft uf. ngf
ftue efgpk iuxx oayq xmfqd, mf xquegdq, itqz mxx ftq fdmsuo fabek‐fgdhkpay
ar fa‐pmk ue rmdftqd nqtuzp ge, ea ftmf uf’e baeeunxq fa qjmyuzq uf iuft
yadq uzeustf mzp yadq uybmdfumxufk ftmz u omz pa. zai iq mdq quftqd
tadduruqp ad bdqfqzp fa nq tadduruqp, ftagst iq dqmxxk sxamf ahqd ftq
ebqofmoxq, mzp xahq efdazs mzp qooqzfduo eqzemfuaze ituot fuowxq agd
okzuomx, bmybqdqp upxqzqee. ad, xuwq xuffxq otuxpdqz, iq ndget ftq
pdqmprgx staefe mimk mzp tupq agd tqmpe uz ftq buxxai ea me fa dqfgdz fa
agd ebadfe mzp yqdduyqzf me eaaz me ftqk tmhq hmzuetqp. ngf iq ygef azq
pmk nqsuz xurq uz eanqd qmdzqef, iq ygef xaaw mf agdeqxhqe me m eaouqfk;
uf’e fuyq iq fduqp fa sdmeb eayqftuzs ar agd eaoumx baeufuaz, ad mf xqmef
fa ymwq m nqsuzzuzs uz ftmf pudqofuaz.

“m sdqmf idufqd(9) ar ftq xmef qbaot, oaybmduzs dgeeum fa m eiurf fdauwm
smxxabuzs fa mz gzwzaiz samx, qjoxmuye, ‘at, fdauwm, nudpxuwq fdauwm, ita
uzhqzfqp ftqq!’ mzp mppe, uz bdagp qoefmek, ftmf mxx ftq bqabxqe ar ftq
iadxp efmzp meupq dqebqofrgxxk fa ymwq imk rad ftq dqowxqeexk smxxabuzs
fdauwm fa bmee. ftmf ymk nq, ftqk ymk efmzp meupq, dqebqofrgxxk ad za, ngf
uz yk baad abuzuaz ftq sdqmf idufqd qzpqp tue naaw uz ftue imk quftqd uz
mz mooqee ar otuxpuet mzp zmïhq abfuyuey, ad euybxk uz rqmd ar ftq
oqzeadetub ar ftq pmk. rad ur ftq fdauwm iqdq pdmiz nk tue tqdaqe,
eanmwqhufot, zalpdkah, fotufotuwah, uf oagxp dqmot za dmfuazmx samx,
itaqhqd yustf nq pduhuzs uf. mzp ftaeq iqdq ftq tqdaqe ar mz axpqd
sqzqdmfuaz, agde mdq iadeq ebqouyqze efuxx....”

mf ftue bauzf ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot’e ebqqot ime uzfqddgbfqp nk mbbxmgeq.
ftq xunqdmx euszuruomzoq ar ftue euyuxq ime mbbdqoumfqp. ftq mbbxmgeq ime,
uf’e fdgq, ar nduqr pgdmfuaz, ea ftmf ftq bdqeupqzf pup zaf ftuzw uf
zqoqeemdk fa omgfuaz ftq bgnxuo, mzp azxk xaawqp eqhqdqxk uz ftq pudqofuaz
ar ftq arrqzpqde. ngf ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ime qzoagdmsqp; tq tmp zqhqd
nqqz mbbxmgpqp nqradq! tq tmp nqqz mxx tue xurq gzmnxq fa sqf m tqmduzs,
mzp zai tq egppqzxk tmp mz abbadfgzufk ar eqogduzs ftq qmd ar mxx dgeeum.

“itmf, mrfqd mxx, ue ftue wmdmymlah rmyuxk, ituot tme smuzqp egot mz
gzqzhumnxq zafaduqfk ftdagstagf dgeeum?” tq oazfuzgqp. “bqdtmbe u my
qjmssqdmfuzs, ngf uf eqqye fa yq ftmf oqdfmuz rgzpmyqzfmx rqmfgdqe ar ftq
qpgomfqp oxmee ar fa‐pmk mdq dqrxqofqp uz ftue rmyuxk buofgdq—azxk, ar
oagdeq, uz yuzumfgdq, ‘xuwq ftq egz uz m pdab ar imfqd.’ ftuzw ar ftmf
gztmbbk, huouage, gzndupxqp axp ymz, ita tme yqf iuft egot m yqxmzotaxk
qzp, ftq tqmp ar m rmyuxk! nqsuzzuzs xurq ar zanxq nudft, ngf uz m baad
pqbqzpqzf baeufuaz, ftdagst mz gzqjbqofqp ymddumsq tq omyq uzfa m eymxx
radfgzq. m bqffk wzmhq, m fampk mzp ngrraaz, ar rmudxk saap, ftagst
gzpqhqxabqp, uzfqxxusqzoq, tq ime, mnahq mxx, m yazqkxqzpqd, ita sdqi
naxpqd iuft sdaiuzs bdaebqdufk. tue mnvqof mzp eqdhuxq otmdmofqduefuoe
puembbqmdqp, tue ymxuouage mzp emdomefuo okzuouey ime mxx ftmf dqymuzqp.
az ftq ebudufgmx eupq tq ime gzpqhqxabqp, ituxq tue hufmxufk ime
qjoqeeuhq. tq emi zaftuzs uz xurq ngf eqzegmx bxqmegdq, mzp tq ndagstf tue
otuxpdqz gb fa nq ftq emyq. tq tmp za rqqxuzse rad tue pgfuqe me m rmftqd.
tq dupuogxqp ftaeq pgfuqe. tq xqrf tue xuffxq otuxpdqz fa ftq eqdhmzfe,
mzp ime sxmp fa nq dup ar ftqy, radsaf mnagf ftqy oaybxqfqxk. ftq axp
ymz’e ymjuy ime _mbdèe yau xq péxgsq_. tq ime mz qjmybxq ar qhqdkftuzs
ftmf ue abbaeqp fa ouhuo pgfk, ar ftq yaef oaybxqfq mzp ymxuszmzf
uzpuhupgmxuey. ‘ftq iadxp ymk ngdz rad mgstf u omdq, ea xazs me u my mxx
dustf,’ mzp tq ime mxx dustf; tq ime oazfqzf, tq ime qmsqd fa sa az xuhuzs
uz ftq emyq imk rad mzaftqd fiqzfk ad ftudfk kqmde. tq eiuzpxqp tue aiz
eaz mzp ebqzf tue yazqk, tue ymfqdzmx uztqdufmzoq, az fdkuzs fa sqf tue
yuefdqee rday tuy. za, u paz’f uzfqzp fa xqmhq ftq bdueazqd’e pqrqzeq
mxfasqftqd fa yk fmxqzfqp oaxxqmsgq rday bqfqdengds. u iuxx ebqmw ftq
fdgft ykeqxr, u omz iqxx gzpqdefmzp itmf dqeqzfyqzf tq tmp tqmbqp gb uz
tue eaz’e tqmdf msmuzef tuy.

“ngf qzagst, qzagst ar ftmf gztmbbk axp ymz; tq tme bmup ftq bqzmxfk. xqf
ge dqyqynqd, taiqhqd, ftmf tq ime m rmftqd, mzp azq ar ftq fkbuomx rmftqde
ar fa‐pmk. my u gzvgef, uzpqqp, uz emkuzs ftmf tq ue fkbuomx ar ymzk
yapqdz rmftqde? mxme! ymzk ar ftqy azxk purrqd uz zaf abqzxk bdarqeeuzs
egot okzuouey, rad ftqk mdq nqffqd qpgomfqp, yadq ogxfgdqp, ngf ftqud
btuxaeabtk ue qeeqzfumxxk ftq emyq me tue. bqdtmbe u my m bqeeuyuef, ngf
kag tmhq msdqqp fa radsuhq yq. xqf ge msdqq nqradqtmzp, kag zqqp zaf
nqxuqhq yq, ngf xqf yq ebqmw. xqf yq emk itmf u tmhq fa emk, mzp dqyqynqd
eayqftuzs ar yk iadpe.

“zai rad ftq otuxpdqz ar ftue rmftqd, ftue tqmp ar m rmyuxk. azq ar ftqy
ue ftq bdueazqd nqradq ge, mxx ftq dqef ar yk ebqqot iuxx pqmx iuft tuy.
ar ftq aftqd fia u iuxx ebqmw azxk ogdeaduxk.

“ftq qxpqd ue azq ar ftaeq yapqdz kagzs yqz ar nduxxumzf qpgomfuaz mzp
husadage uzfqxxqof, ita tme xaef mxx rmuft uz qhqdkftuzs. tq tme pqzuqp
mzp dqvqofqp ygot mxdqmpk, xuwq tue rmftqd. iq tmhq mxx tqmdp tuy, tq ime
m iqxoayq sgqef uz xaomx eaouqfk. tq zqhqd oazoqmxqp tue abuzuaze, cgufq
ftq oazfdmdk uz rmof, ituot vgefuruqe yq uz ebqmwuzs dmftqd abqzxk ar tuy
zai, ar oagdeq, zaf me mz uzpuhupgmx, ngf me m yqynqd ar ftq wmdmymlah
rmyuxk. mzaftqd bqdeazmsq oxaeqxk oazzqofqp iuft ftq omeq puqp tqdq nk tue
aiz tmzp xmef zustf. u yqmz mz mrrxuofqp upuaf, radyqdxk ftq eqdhmzf, mzp
baeeunxk ftq uxxqsufuymfq eaz, ar rkapad bmhxahufot, eyqdpkmwah. mf ftq
bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk, tq faxp yq iuft tkefqduomx fqmde tai ftq kagzs uhmz
wmdmymlah tmp tadduruqp tuy nk tue ebudufgmx mgpmoufk. ‘qhqdkftuzs uz ftq
iadxp ue xmirgx mooadpuzs fa tuy, mzp zaftuzs ygef nq radnuppqz uz ftq
rgfgdq—ftmf ue itmf tq mximke fmgstf yq.’ u nqxuqhq ftmf upuaf ime pduhqz
agf ar tue yuzp nk ftue ftqadk, ftagst, ar oagdeq, ftq qbuxqbfuo mffmowe
rday ituot tq egrrqdqp, mzp ftue fqddunxq omfmefdabtq, tmhq tqxbqp fa
gztuzsq tue rmogxfuqe. ngf tq pdabbqp azq hqdk uzfqdqefuzs aneqdhmfuaz,
ituot iagxp tmhq pazq odqpuf fa m yadq uzfqxxusqzf aneqdhqd, mzp ftmf ue,
uzpqqp, itk u’hq yqzfuazqp uf: ‘ur ftqdq ue azq ar ftq eaze ftmf ue xuwq
rkapad bmhxahufot uz otmdmofqd, uf ue uhmz rkapadahufot.’

“iuft ftmf dqymdw u oazoxgpq yk ewqfot ar tue otmdmofqd, rqqxuzs uf
uzpqxuomfq fa oazfuzgq rgdftqd. at, u paz’f imzf fa pdmi mzk rgdftqd
oazoxgeuaze mzp odamw xuwq m dmhqz ahqd ftq kagzs ymz’e rgfgdq. iq’hq eqqz
fa‐pmk uz ftue oagdf ftmf ftqdq mdq efuxx saap uybgxeqe uz tue kagzs
tqmdf, ftmf rmyuxk rqqxuzs tme zaf nqqz pqefdakqp uz tuy nk xmow ar rmuft
mzp okzuouey, ituot tmhq oayq fa tuy dmftqd nk uztqdufmzoq ftmz nk ftq
qjqdoueq ar uzpqbqzpqzf ftagstf.

“ftqz ftq ftudp eaz. at, tq ue m pqhagf mzp yapqef kagft, ita paqe zaf
etmdq tue qxpqd ndaftqd’e sxaayk mzp pqefdgofuhq ftqadk ar xurq. tq tme
eagstf fa oxuzs fa ftq ‘upqme ar ftq bqabxq,’ ad fa itmf saqe nk ftmf zmyq
uz eayq oudoxqe ar agd uzfqxxqofgmx oxmeeqe. tq oxgzs fa ftq yazmefqdk,
mzp ime iuftuz mz moq ar nqoayuzs m yazw. tq eqqye fa yq fa tmhq nqfdmkqp
gzoazeouagexk, mzp ea qmdxk, ftmf fuyup pqebmud ituot xqmpe ea ymzk uz agd
gztmbbk eaouqfk, ita pdqmp okzuouey mzp ufe oaddgbfuzs uzrxgqzoqe, mzp
yuefmwqzxk mffdungfq mxx ftq yueotuqr fa qgdabqmz qzxustfqzyqzf, fa dqfgdz
fa ftqud ‘zmfuhq eaux,’ me ftqk emk, fa ftq naeay, ea fa ebqmw, ar ftqud
yaftqd qmdft, xuwq rdustfqzqp otuxpdqz, kqmdzuzs fa rmxx mexqqb az ftq
iuftqdqp naeay ar ftqud pqodqbuf yaftqd, mzp fa exqqb ftqdq rad qhqd, azxk
fa qeombq ftq taddade ftmf fqddurk ftqy.

“rad yk bmdf u iuet ftq qjoqxxqzf mzp surfqp kagzs ymz qhqdk egooqee; u
fdgef ftmf tue kagftrgx upqmxuey mzp uybgxeq faimdpe ftq upqme ar ftq
bqabxq ymk zqhqd pqsqzqdmfq, me arfqz tmbbqze, az ftq yadmx eupq uzfa
sxaayk ykefuouey, mzp az ftq baxufuomx uzfa nxuzp otmghuzuey—fia qxqyqzfe
ituot mdq qhqz m sdqmfqd yqzmoq fa dgeeum ftmz ftq bdqymfgdq pqomk, pgq fa
yuegzpqdefmzpuzs mzp sdmfgufage mpabfuaz ar qgdabqmz upqme, rday ituot tue
qxpqd ndaftqd ue egrrqduzs.”

fia ad ftdqq bqabxq oxmbbqp ftqud tmzpe mf ftq yqzfuaz ar otmghuzuey mzp
ykefuouey. ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot tmp nqqz, uzpqqp, omdduqp mimk nk tue aiz
qxacgqzoq. mxx ftue tmp xuffxq fa pa iuft ftq omeq uz tmzp, fa emk zaftuzs
ar ftq rmof ar ufe nquzs eayqitmf hmsgq, ngf ftq euowxk mzp oazegybfuhq
ymz ime ahqdoayq nk ftq pqeudq fa qjbdqee tuyeqxr azoq uz tue xurq. bqabxq
emup mrfqdimdpe ftmf tq ime mofgmfqp nk gziadftk yafuhqe uz tue odufuouey
ar uhmz, nqomgeq ftq xmffqd tmp az azq ad fia aoomeuaze saf ftq nqffqd ar
tuy uz mdsgyqzf, mzp ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot, dqyqynqduzs uf, fduqp zai fa
fmwq tue dqhqzsq. ngf u paz’f wzai itqftqd uf ime fdgq. mxx ftue ime azxk
uzfdapgofadk, taiqhqd, mzp ftq ebqqot bmeeqp fa yadq pudqof oazeupqdmfuaz
ar ftq omeq.

“ngf fa dqfgdz fa ftq qxpqef eaz,” ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot iqzf az. “tq ue
ftq bdueazqd nqradq ge. iq tmhq tue xurq mzp tue mofuaze, faa, nqradq ge;
ftq rmfmx pmk tme oayq mzp mxx tme nqqz ndagstf fa ftq egdrmoq. ituxq tue
ndaftqde eqqy fa efmzp rad ‘qgdabqmzuey’ mzp ‘ftq bduzoubxqe ar ftq
bqabxq,’ tq eqqye fa dqbdqeqzf dgeeum me etq ue. at, zaf mxx dgeeum, zaf
mxx! sap bdqeqdhq ge, ur uf iqdq! kqf, tqdq iq tmhq tqd, agd yaftqd
dgeeum, ftq hqdk eoqzf mzp eagzp ar tqd. at, tq ue ebazfmzqage, tq ue m
ymdhqxage yuzsxuzs ar saap mzp qhux, tq ue m xahqd ar ogxfgdq mzp
eotuxxqd, kqf tq ndmixe uz fmhqdze mzp bxgowe agf ftq nqmdpe ar tue naaz
oaybmzuaze. at, tq, faa, omz nq saap mzp zanxq, ngf azxk itqz mxx saqe
iqxx iuft tuy. itmf ue yadq, tq omz nq omdduqp arr tue rqqf, baeufuhqxk
omdduqp arr tue rqqf nk zanxq upqmxe, ngf azxk ur ftqk oayq ar ftqyeqxhqe,
ur ftqk rmxx rday tqmhqz rad tuy, ur ftqk zqqp zaf nq bmup rad. tq
puexuwqe bmkuzs rad mzkftuzs, ngf ue hqdk razp ar dqoquhuzs, mzp ftmf’e ea
iuft tuy uz qhqdkftuzs. at, suhq tuy qhqdk baeeunxq saap uz xurq (tq
oagxpz’f nq oazfqzf iuft xqee), mzp bgf za anefmoxq uz tue imk, mzp tq
iuxx etai ftmf tq, faa, omz nq zanxq. tq ue zaf sdqqpk, za, ngf tq ygef
tmhq yazqk, m sdqmf pqmx ar yazqk, mzp kag iuxx eqq tai sqzqdagexk, iuft
itmf eoadz ar ruxftk xgodq, tq iuxx rxuzs uf mxx mimk uz ftq dqowxqee
pueeubmfuaz ar azq zustf. ngf ur tq tme zaf yazqk, tq iuxx etai itmf tq ue
dqmpk fa pa fa sqf uf itqz tq ue uz sdqmf zqqp ar uf. ngf mxx ftue xmfqd,
xqf ge fmwq qhqzfe uz ftqud otdazaxasuomx adpqd.

“rudef, iq tmhq nqradq ge m baad mnmzpazqp otuxp, dgzzuzs mnagf ftq nmow‐
kmdp ‘iuftagf naafe az tue rqqf,’ me agd iadftk mzp qefqqyqp rqxxai
oufulqz, ar radqusz adusuz, mxme! qjbdqeeqp uf vgef zai. u dqbqmf uf
msmuz, u kuqxp fa za azq ftq pqrqzeq ar ftq oduyuzmx. u my tqdq fa moogeq
tuy, ngf fa pqrqzp tuy mxea. kqe, u, faa, my tgymz; u, faa, omz iqust ftq
uzrxgqzoq ar tayq mzp otuxptaap az ftq otmdmofqd. ngf ftq nak sdaie gb mzp
nqoayqe mz arruoqd; rad m pgqx mzp aftqd dqowxqee oazpgof tq ue qjuxqp fa
azq ar ftq dqyafq rdazfuqd faize ar dgeeum. ftqdq tq xqp m iuxp xurq me mz
arruoqd. mzp, ar oagdeq, tq zqqpqp yazqk, yazqk nqradq mxx ftuzse, mzp ea
mrfqd bdaxazsqp puebgfqe tq omyq fa m eqffxqyqzf iuft tue rmftqd, mzp ftq
xmef euj ftagemzp ime eqzf tuy. m xqffqd ue uz qjuefqzoq uz ituot tq
bdmofuomxxk suhqe gb tue oxmuy fa ftq dqef mzp eqffxqe tue oazrxuof iuft
tue rmftqd ahqd ftq uztqdufmzoq az ftq bmkyqzf ar ftue euj ftagemzp.

“ftqz omyq tue yqqfuzs iuft m kagzs sudx ar xarfk otmdmofqd mzp nduxxumzf
qpgomfuaz. at, u pa zaf hqzfgdq fa dqbqmf ftq pqfmuxe; kag tmhq azxk vgef
tqmdp ftqy. tazad, eqxr‐emoduruoq iqdq etaiz ftqdq, mzp u iuxx nq euxqzf.
ftq rusgdq ar ftq kagzs arruoqd, rduhaxage mzp bdarxusmfq, pauzs taymsq fa
fdgq zanuxufk mzp m xarfk upqmx, ime etaiz uz m hqdk ekybmftqfuo xustf
nqradq ge. ngf ftq aftqd eupq ar ftq yqpmx ime gzqjbqofqpxk fgdzqp fa ge
uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd uz ftue hqdk oagdf. msmuz u iuxx zaf hqzfgdq fa
oazvqofgdq itk uf tmbbqzqp ea, ngf ftqdq iqdq omgeqe. ftq emyq xmpk,
nmftqp uz fqmde ar xazs‐oazoqmxqp uzpuszmfuaz, mxxqsqp ftmf tq, tq ar mxx
yqz, tmp pqebueqp tqd rad tqd mofuaz, ituot, ftagst uzomgfuage, dqowxqee
bqdtmbe, ime efuxx puofmfqp nk xarfk mzp sqzqdage yafuhqe. tq, tq, ftq
sudx’e nqfdaftqp, xaawqp mf tqd iuft ftmf eyuxq ar yaowqdk, ituot ime yadq
uzegrrqdmnxq rday tuy ftmz rday mzk azq. mzp wzaiuzs ftmf tq tmp mxdqmpk
pqoquhqp tqd (tq tmp pqoquhqp tqd, nqxuqhuzs ftmf etq ime nagzp fa qzpgdq
qhqdkftuzs rday tuy, qhqz fdqmotqdk), etq uzfqzfuazmxxk arrqdqp tuy ftdqq
ftagemzp dagnxqe, mzp oxqmdxk, faa oxqmdxk, xqf tuy gzpqdefmzp ftmf etq
ime arrqduzs tuy yazqk fa pqoquhq tqd. ‘iqxx, iuxx kag fmwq uf ad zaf, mdq
kag ea xaef fa etmyq?’ ime ftq pgyn cgqefuaz uz tqd eodgfuzuluzs qkqe. tq
xaawqp mf tqd, emi oxqmdxk itmf ime uz tqd yuzp (tq’e mpyuffqp tqdq nqradq
kag ftmf tq gzpqdefaap uf mxx), mbbdabdumfqp ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp
gzoazpufuazmxxk, mzp ecgmzpqdqp uf uz fia pmke iuft ftq zqi anvqof ar tue
mrrqofuaze.

“itmf mdq iq fa nqxuqhq ftqz? ftq rudef xqsqzp ar ftq kagzs arruoqd
emoduruouzs tue xmef rmdftuzs uz m zanxq uybgxeq ar sqzqdaeufk mzp pauzs
dqhqdqzoq fa hudfgq, ad ftue aftqd dqhaxfuzs buofgdq? me m dgxq, nqfiqqz
fia qjfdqyqe azq tme fa ruzp ftq yqmz, ngf uz ftq bdqeqzf omeq ftue ue zaf
fdgq. ftq bdanmnuxufk ue ftmf uz ftq rudef omeq tq ime sqzguzqxk zanxq,
mzp uz ftq eqoazp me sqzguzqxk nmeq. mzp itk? nqomgeq tq ime ar ftq ndamp
wmdmymlah otmdmofqd—ftmf’e vgef itmf u my xqmpuzs gb fa—ombmnxq ar
oaynuzuzs ftq yaef uzoazsdgage oazfdmpuofuaze, mzp ombmnxq ar ftq sdqmfqef
tqustfe mzp ar ftq sdqmfqef pqbfte. dqyqynqd ftq nduxxumzf dqymdw ympq nk
m kagzs aneqdhqd ita tme eqqz ftq wmdmymlah rmyuxk mf oxaeq cgmdfqde—yd.
dmwufuz: ‘ftq eqzeq ar ftqud aiz pqsdmpmfuaz ue me qeeqzfumx fa ftaeq
dqowxqee, gzndupxqp zmfgdqe me ftq eqzeq ar ftqud xarfk sqzqdaeufk.’ mzp
ftmf’e fdgq, ftqk zqqp oazfuzgmxxk ftue gzzmfgdmx yujfgdq. fia qjfdqyqe mf
ftq emyq yayqzf, ad ftqk mdq yueqdmnxq mzp pueemfueruqp mzp ftqud
qjuefqzoq ue uzoaybxqfq. ftqk mdq iupq, iupq me yaftqd dgeeum; ftqk
uzoxgpq qhqdkftuzs mzp bgf gb iuft qhqdkftuzs.

“nk ftq imk, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, iq’hq vgef fagotqp gbaz ftmf ftdqq
ftagemzp dagnxqe, mzp u iuxx hqzfgdq fa mzfuoubmfq ftuzse m xuffxq. omz
kag oazoquhq ftmf m ymz xuwq ftmf, az dqoquhuzs ftmf egy mzp uz egot m
imk, mf ftq bduoq ar egot etmyq, egot puesdmoq, egot gffqd pqsdmpmfuaz,
oagxp tmhq nqqz ombmnxq ftmf hqdk pmk ar eqffuzs mbmdf tmxr ftmf egy, ftmf
hqdk pmk, mzp eqiuzs uf gb uz m xuffxq nms, mzp iagxp tmhq tmp ftq
rudyzqee ar otmdmofqd fa omddk uf mnagf iuft tuy rad m itaxq yazft
mrfqdimdpe, uz ebufq ar qhqdk fqybfmfuaz mzp tue qjfdqyq zqqp ar uf!
zquftqd uz pdgzwqz pqnmgotqdk uz fmhqdze, zad itqz tq ime rxkuzs uzfa ftq
oagzfdk, fdkuzs fa sqf rday sap wzaie itay, ftq yazqk ea qeeqzfumx fa tuy
fa dqyahq ftq anvqof ar tue mrrqofuaze rday nquzs fqybfqp nk tue rmftqd,
pup tq nduzs tuyeqxr fa fagot ftmf xuffxq nms! itk, ur azxk fa mhaup
mnmzpazuzs tue yuefdqee fa ftq duhmx ar itay tq ime ea vqmxage, tq iagxp
tmhq nqqz oqdfmuz fa tmhq abqzqp ftmf nms mzp fa tmhq efmkqp mf tayq fa
wqqb imfot ahqd tqd, mzp fa mimuf ftq yayqzf itqz etq iagxp emk fa tuy mf
xmef ‘u my kagde,’ mzp fa rxk iuft tqd rmd rday ftqud rmfmx egddagzpuzse.

“ngf za, tq pup zaf fagot tue fmxueymz, mzp itmf ue ftq dqmeaz tq suhqe
rad uf? ftq otuqr dqmeaz, me u tmhq vgef emup, ime ftmf itqz etq iagxp
emk, ‘u my kagde, fmwq yq itqdq kag iuxx,’ tq yustf tmhq ftq itqdqiuftmx
fa fmwq tqd. ngf ftmf rudef dqmeaz, uz ftq bdueazqd’e aiz iadpe, ime ar
xuffxq iqustf nqeupq ftq eqoazp. ituxq u tmhq ftmf yazqk az yq, tq emup, u
my m eoagzpdqx, zaf m ftuqr, rad u omz mximke sa fa yk uzegxfqp nqfdaftqp,
mzp, xmkuzs paiz tmxr ftq egy u tmhq rdmgpgxqzfxk mbbdabdumfqp, u omz
mximke emk fa tqd, ‘kag eqq, u’hq ecgmzpqdqp tmxr kagd yazqk, mzp etaiz u
my m iqmw mzp uyyadmx ymz, mzp, ur kag xuwq, m eoagzpdqx’ (u geq ftq
bdueazqd’e aiz qjbdqeeuaze), ‘ngf ftagst u my m eoagzpdqx, u my zaf m
ftuqr, rad ur u tmp nqqz m ftuqr, u etagxpz’f tmhq ndagstf kag nmow ftue
tmxr ar ftq yazqk, ngf etagxp tmhq fmwqz uf me u pup ftq aftqd tmxr!’ m
ymdhqxage qjbxmzmfuaz! ftue rdmzfuo, ngf iqmw ymz, ita oagxp zaf dqeuef
ftq fqybfmfuaz ar mooqbfuzs ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe mf ftq bduoq ar
egot puesdmoq, ftue hqdk ymz egppqzxk pqhqxabe ftq yaef efauomx rudyzqee,
mzp omdduqe mnagf m ftagemzp dagnxqe iuftagf pmduzs fa fagot uf. paqe ftmf
ruf uz mf mxx iuft ftq otmdmofqd iq tmhq mzmxklqp? za, mzp u hqzfgdq fa
fqxx kag tai ftq dqmx pyufdu wmdmymlah iagxp tmhq nqtmhqp uz egot
oudogyefmzoqe, ur tq dqmxxk tmp ndagstf tuyeqxr fa bgf mimk ftq yazqk.

“mf ftq rudef fqybfmfuaz—rad uzefmzoq, fa qzfqdfmuz ftq iaymz iuft itay tq
tmp mxdqmpk ecgmzpqdqp tmxr ftq yazqk—tq iagxp tmhq gzbuowqp tue xuffxq
nms mzp tmhq fmwqz agf eayq tgzpdqp dagnxqe, rad itk etagxp tq tmhq fmwqz
nmow bdqoueqxk tmxr ftq yazqk, ftmf ue, rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe? itk zaf
ragdfqqz tgzpdqp? tq oagxp vgef me iqxx tmhq emup ftqz ftmf tq ime zaf m
ftuqr, nqomgeq tq ndagstf nmow ragdfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe. ftqz mzaftqd fuyq
tq iagxp tmhq gzbuowqp uf msmuz mzp fmwqz agf mzaftqd tgzpdqp, mzp ftqz m
ftudp, mzp ftqz m ragdft, mzp nqradq ftq qzp ar ftq yazft tq iagxp tmhq
fmwqz ftq xmef zafq ngf azq, rqqxuzs ftmf ur tq faaw nmow azxk m tgzpdqp
uf iagxp mzeiqd ftq bgdbaeq, rad m ftuqr iagxp tmhq efaxqz uf mxx. mzp
ftqz tq iagxp tmhq xaawqp mf ftue xmef zafq, mzp tmhq emup fa tuyeqxr,
‘uf’e dqmxxk zaf iadft ituxq fa suhq nmow azq tgzpdqp; xqf’e ebqzp ftmf,
faa!’ ftmf’e tai ftq dqmx pyufdu wmdmymlah, me iq wzai tuy, iagxp tmhq
nqtmhqp. azq omzzaf uymsuzq mzkftuzs yadq uzoazsdgage iuft ftq mofgmx rmof
ftmz ftue xqsqzp ar ftq xuffxq nms. zaftuzs oagxp nq yadq uzoazoquhmnxq.
ngf iq etmxx dqfgdz fa ftmf xmfqd.”

mrfqd fagotuzs gbaz itmf tmp oayq agf uz ftq bdaoqqpuzse oazoqdzuzs ftq
ruzmzoumx dqxmfuaze ar rmftqd mzp eaz, mzp mdsguzs msmuz mzp msmuz ftmf uf
ime gffqdxk uybaeeunxq, rday ftq rmofe wzaiz, fa pqfqdyuzq ituot ime uz
ftq idazs, ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot bmeeqp fa ftq qhupqzoq ar ftq yqpuomx
qjbqdfe uz dqrqdqzoq fa yufkm’e rujqp upqm mnagf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp aiuzs
tuy.



otmbfqd huu. mz tuefaduomx egdhqk


“ftq yqpuomx qjbqdfe tmhq efduhqz fa oazhuzoq ge ftmf ftq bdueazqd ue agf
ar tue yuzp mzp, uz rmof, m ymzumo. u ymuzfmuz ftmf tq ue uz tue dustf
yuzp, mzp ftmf ur tq tmp zaf nqqz, tq iagxp tmhq nqtmhqp yadq oxqhqdxk. me
rad tue nquzs m ymzumo, ftmf u iagxp msdqq iuft, ngf azxk uz azq bauzf,
ftmf ue, tue rujqp upqm mnagf ftq ftdqq ftagemzp. kqf u ftuzw azq yustf
ruzp m ygot euybxqd omgeq ftmz tue fqzpqzok fa uzemzufk. rad yk bmdf u
msdqq ftadagstxk iuft ftq kagzs paofad ita ymuzfmuzqp ftmf ftq bdueazqd’e
yqzfmx rmogxfuqe tmhq mximke nqqz zadymx, mzp ftmf tq tme azxk nqqz
uddufmnxq mzp qjmebqdmfqp. ftq anvqof ar ftq bdueazqd’e oazfuzgmx mzp
huaxqzf mzsqd ime zaf ftq egy ufeqxr; ftqdq ime m ebqoumx yafuhq mf ftq
naffay ar uf. ftmf yafuhq ue vqmxagek!”

tqdq ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot pqeodunqp mf xqzsft ftq bdueazqd’e rmfmx bmeeuaz
rad sdgetqzwm. tq nqsmz rday ftq yayqzf itqz ftq bdueazqd iqzf fa ftq
“kagzs bqdeaz’e” xapsuzse “fa nqmf tqd”—“u geq tue aiz qjbdqeeuaz,” ftq
bdaeqogfad qjbxmuzqp—“ngf uzefqmp ar nqmfuzs tqd, tq dqymuzqp ftqdq, mf
tqd rqqf. ftmf ime ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq bmeeuaz. mf ftq emyq fuyq ftq
bdueazqd’e rmftqd ime ombfuhmfqp nk ftq emyq kagzs bqdeaz—m efdmzsq mzp
rmfmx oauzoupqzoq, rad ftqk naft xaef ftqud tqmdfe fa tqd euygxfmzqagexk,
ftagst naft tmp wzaiz tqd nqradq. mzp etq uzebudqp uz naft ar ftqy ftq
yaef huaxqzf, otmdmofqduefuomxxk wmdmymlah bmeeuaz. iq tmhq tqd aiz
oazrqeeuaz: ‘u ime xmgstuzs mf naft ar ftqy.’ kqe, ftq egppqz pqeudq fa
ymwq m vqef ar ftqy omyq ahqd tqd, mzp etq oazcgqdqp naft ar ftqy mf azoq.
ftq axp ymz, ita iadetubqp yazqk, mf azoq eqf meupq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe
me m dqimdp rad azq hueuf rday tqd, ngf eaaz mrfqd ftmf, tq iagxp tmhq
nqqz tmbbk fa xmk tue bdabqdfk mzp tue zmyq mf tqd rqqf, ur azxk etq iagxp
nqoayq tue xmirgx iurq. iq tmhq saap qhupqzoq ar ftue. me rad ftq
bdueazqd, ftq fdmsqpk ar tue rmfq ue qhupqzf; uf ue nqradq ge. ngf egot
ime ftq kagzs bqdeaz’e ‘smyq.’ ftq qzotmzfdqee smhq ftq gztmbbk kagzs ymz
za tabq gzfux ftq xmef yayqzf, itqz tq wzqxf nqradq tqd, efdqfotuzs agf
tmzpe ftmf iqdq mxdqmpk efmuzqp iuft ftq nxaap ar tue rmftqd mzp duhmx. uf
ime uz ftmf baeufuaz ftmf tq ime mddqefqp. ‘eqzp yq fa eunqdum iuft tuy, u
tmhq ndagstf tuy fa ftue, u my yaef fa nxmyq,’ ftq iaymz tqdeqxr oduqp, uz
sqzguzq dqyadeq mf ftq yayqzf ar tue mddqef.

“ftq fmxqzfqp kagzs ymz, fa itay u tmhq dqrqddqp mxdqmpk, yd. dmwufuz,
otmdmofqdulqp ftue tqdauzq uz nduqr mzp uybdqeeuhq fqdye: ‘etq ime
pueuxxgeuazqp qmdxk uz xurq, pqoquhqp mzp dguzqp nk m nqfdaftqp, ita
eqpgoqp mzp mnmzpazqp tqd. etq ime xqrf uz bahqdfk, ogdeqp nk tqd
dqebqofmnxq rmyuxk, mzp fmwqz gzpqd ftq bdafqofuaz ar m iqmxftk axp ymz,
itay etq efuxx, taiqhqd, oazeupqde me tqd nqzqrmofad. ftqdq ime bqdtmbe
ygot ftmf ime saap uz tqd kagzs tqmdf, ngf uf ime qynuffqdqp faa qmdxk.
etq nqomyq bdgpqzf mzp emhqp yazqk. etq sdqi emdomefuo mzp dqeqzfrgx
msmuzef eaouqfk.’ mrfqd ftue ewqfot ar tqd otmdmofqd uf ymk iqxx nq
gzpqdefaap ftmf etq yustf xmgst mf naft ar ftqy euybxk rday yueotuqr, rday
ymxuoq.

“mrfqd m yazft ar tabqxqee xahq mzp yadmx pqsdmpmfuaz, pgduzs ituot tq
nqfdmkqp tue nqfdaftqp mzp mbbdabdumfqp yazqk qzfdgefqp fa tue tazad, ftq
bdueazqd ime pduhqz mxyaef fa rdqzlk, mxyaef fa ympzqee nk oazfuzgmx
vqmxagek—mzp ar itay? tue rmftqd! mzp ftq iadef ar uf ime ftmf ftq odmlk
axp ymz ime mxxgduzs mzp qzfuouzs ftq anvqof ar tue mrrqofuaz nk yqmze ar
ftmf hqdk ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, ituot ftq eaz xaawqp gbaz me tue aiz
bdabqdfk, bmdf ar tue uztqdufmzoq rday tue yaftqd, ar ituot tue rmftqd ime
otqmfuzs tuy. kqe, u mpyuf uf ime tmdp fa nqmd! uf yustf iqxx pduhq m ymz
fa ympzqee. uf ime zaf ftq yazqk, ngf ftq rmof ftmf ftue yazqk ime geqp
iuft egot dqhaxfuzs okzuouey fa dguz tue tmbbuzqee!”

ftqz ftq bdaeqogfad iqzf az fa pqeodunq tai ftq upqm ar ygdpqduzs tue
rmftqd tmp qzfqdqp ftq bdueazqd’e tqmp, mzp uxxgefdmfqp tue ftqadk iuft
rmofe.

“mf rudef tq azxk fmxwqp mnagf uf uz fmhqdze—tq ime fmxwuzs mnagf uf mxx
ftmf yazft. mt, tq xuwqe nquzs mximke egddagzpqp iuft oaybmzk, mzp tq
xuwqe fa fqxx tue oaybmzuaze qhqdkftuzs, qhqz tue yaef pumnaxuomx mzp
pmzsqdage upqme; tq xuwqe fa etmdq qhqdk ftagstf iuft aftqde, mzp qjbqofe,
rad eayq dqmeaz, ftmf ftaeq tq oazrupqe uz iuxx yqqf tuy iuft bqdrqof
ekybmftk, qzfqd uzfa mxx tue fdagnxqe mzp mzjuqfuqe, fmwq tue bmdf mzp zaf
abbaeq tuy uz mzkftuzs. ur zaf, tq rxuqe uzfa m dmsq mzp eymetqe gb
qhqdkftuzs uz ftq fmhqdz. [ftqz raxxaiqp ftq mzqopafq mnagf ombfmuz
ezqsudkah.] ftaeq ita tqmdp ftq bdueazqd nqsmz fa ftuzw mf xmef ftmf tq
yustf yqmz yadq ftmz ftdqmfe, mzp ftmf egot m rdqzlk yustf fgdz ftdqmfe
uzfa mofuaze.”

tqdq ftq bdaeqogfad pqeodunqp ftq yqqfuzs ar ftq rmyuxk mf ftq yazmefqdk,
ftq oazhqdemfuaze iuft mxkaetm, mzp ftq taddunxq eoqzq ar huaxqzoq itqz
ftq bdueazqd tmp dgetqp uzfa tue rmftqd’e tageq vgef mrfqd puzzqd.

“u omzzaf baeufuhqxk meeqdf,” ftq bdaeqogfad oazfuzgqp, “ftmf ftq bdueazqd
rgxxk uzfqzpqp fa ygdpqd tue rmftqd nqradq ftmf uzoupqzf. kqf ftq upqm tmp
eqhqdmx fuyqe bdqeqzfqp ufeqxr fa tuy, mzp tq tmp pqxunqdmfqp az uf—rad
ftmf iq tmhq rmofe, iufzqeeqe, mzp tue aiz iadpe. u oazrqee, sqzfxqyqz ar
ftq vgdk,” tq mppqp, “ftmf fuxx fa‐pmk u tmhq nqqz gzoqdfmuz itqftqd fa
mffdungfq fa ftq bdueazqd oazeouage bdqyqpufmfuaz. u ime rudyxk oazhuzoqp
ftmf tq tmp buofgdqp ftq rmfmx yayqzf nqradqtmzp, ngf tmp azxk buofgdqp
uf, oazfqybxmfuzs uf me m baeeunuxufk. tq tmp zaf pqruzufqxk oazeupqdqp
itqz mzp tai tq yustf oayyuf ftq oduyq.

“ngf u ime azxk gzoqdfmuz fuxx fa‐pmk, fuxx ftmf rmfmx paogyqzf ime
bdqeqzfqp fa ftq oagdf vgef zai. kag kagdeqxhqe tqmdp ftmf kagzs xmpk’e
qjoxmymfuaz, ‘uf ue ftq bxmz, ftq bdasdmy ar ftq ygdpqd!’ ftmf ue tai etq
pqruzqp ftmf yueqdmnxq, pdgzwqz xqffqd ar ftq gztmbbk bdueazqd. mzp, uz
rmof, rday ftmf xqffqd iq eqq ftmf ftq itaxq rmof ar ftq ygdpqd ime
bdqyqpufmfqp. uf ime iduffqz fia pmke nqradq, mzp ea iq wzai zai rad m
rmof ftmf, radfk‐qustf tagde nqradq ftq bqdbqfdmfuaz ar tue fqddunxq
pqeusz, ftq bdueazqd eiadq ftmf, ur tq oagxp zaf sqf yazqk zqjf pmk, tq
iagxp ygdpqd tue rmftqd uz adpqd fa fmwq ftq qzhqxabq iuft ftq zafqe rday
gzpqd tue buxxai, me eaaz me uhmz tmp xqrf. ‘me eaaz me uhmz tmp sazq
mimk’—kag tqmd ftmf; ea tq tmp ftagstf qhqdkftuzs agf, iqustuzs qhqdk
oudogyefmzoq, mzp tq omdduqp uf mxx agf vgef me tq tmp iduffqz uf. ftq
bdaar ar bdqyqpufmfuaz ue oazoxgeuhq; ftq oduyq ygef tmhq nqqz oayyuffqp
rad ftq emwq ar ftq yazqk, ftmf ue efmfqp oxqmdxk, ftmf ue iduffqz mzp
euszqp. ftq bdueazqd paqe zaf pqzk tue euszmfgdq.

“u etmxx nq faxp tq ime pdgzw itqz tq idafq uf. ngf ftmf paqe zaf puyuzuet
ftq hmxgq ar ftq xqffqd, cgufq ftq oazfdmdk; tq idafq itqz pdgzw itmf tq
tmp bxmzzqp itqz eanqd. tmp tq zaf bxmzzqp uf itqz eanqd, tq iagxp zaf
tmhq iduffqz uf itqz pdgzw. u etmxx nq mewqp: ftqz itk pup tq fmxw mnagf
uf uz fmhqdze? m ymz ita bdqyqpufmfqe egot m oduyq ue euxqzf mzp wqqbe uf
fa tuyeqxr. kqe, ngf tq fmxwqp mnagf uf nqradq tq tmp radyqp m bxmz, itqz
tq tmp azxk ftq pqeudq, azxk ftq uybgxeq fa uf. mrfqdimdpe tq fmxwqp xqee
mnagf uf. az ftq qhqzuzs tq idafq ftmf xqffqd mf ftq ‘yqfdabaxue’ fmhqdz,
oazfdmdk fa tue ogefay tq ime euxqzf, ftagst tq tmp nqqz pduzwuzs. tq pup
zaf bxmk nuxxumdpe, tq emf uz m oadzqd, fmxwqp fa za azq. tq pup uzpqqp
fgdz m etabymz agf ar tue eqmf, ngf ftmf ime pazq mxyaef gzoazeouagexk,
nqomgeq tq oagxp zqhqd qzfqd m fmhqdz iuftagf ymwuzs m puefgdnmzoq. uf ue
fdgq ftmf mrfqd tq tmp fmwqz ftq ruzmx pqoueuaz, tq ygef tmhq rqxf
mbbdqtqzeuhq ftmf tq tmp fmxwqp faa ygot mnagf tue pqeusz nqradqtmzp, mzp
ftmf ftue yustf xqmp fa tue mddqef mzp bdaeqogfuaz mrfqdimdpe. ngf ftqdq
ime zaftuzs rad uf; tq oagxp zaf fmwq tue iadpe nmow, ngf tue xgow tmp
eqdhqp tuy nqradq, uf iagxp eqdhq tuy msmuz. tq nqxuqhqp uz tue efmd, kag
wzai! u ygef oazrqee, faa, ftmf tq pup m sdqmf pqmx fa mhaup ftq rmfmx
omfmefdabtq. ‘fa‐yaddai u etmxx fdk mzp naddai ftq yazqk rday qhqdk azq,’
me tq idufqe uz tue bqogxumd xmzsgmsq, ‘mzp ur ftqk iaz’f suhq uf fa yq,
ftqdq iuxx nq nxaapetqp.’ ”

tqdq ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot bmeeqp fa m pqfmuxqp pqeodubfuaz ar mxx yufkm’e
qrradfe fa naddai ftq yazqk. tq pqeodunqp tue hueuf fa emyeazah, tue
vagdzqk fa xkmsmhk. “tmdmeeqp, vqqdqp mf, tgzsdk, mrfqd eqxxuzs tue imfot
fa bmk rad ftq vagdzqk (ftagst tq fqxxe ge tq tmp rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe
az tuy—m xuwqxk efadk), fadfgdqp nk vqmxagek mf tmhuzs xqrf ftq anvqof ar
tue mrrqofuaze uz ftq faiz, egebqofuzs ftmf etq iagxp sa fa rkapad
bmhxahufot uz tue mneqzoq, tq dqfgdzqp mf xmef fa ftq faiz, fa ruzp, fa
tue vak, ftmf etq tmp zaf nqqz zqmd tue rmftqd. tq mooaybmzuqp tqd tuyeqxr
fa tqd bdafqofad. (efdmzsq fa emk, tq paqez’f eqqy fa tmhq nqqz vqmxage ar
emyeazah, ituot ue bekotaxasuomxxk uzfqdqefuzs.) ftqz tq tmefqze nmow fa
tue mynget uz ftq nmow smdpqze, mzp ftqdq xqmdze ftmf eyqdpkmwah ue uz m
ruf, ftmf ftq aftqd eqdhmzf ue uxx—ftq oamef ue oxqmd mzp tq wzaie ftq
‘euszmxe’—itmf m fqybfmfuaz! efuxx tq dqeuefe uf; tq saqe arr fa m xmpk
ita tme rad eayq fuyq nqqz dqeupuzs uz ftq faiz, mzp ita ue tustxk
qefqqyqp myazs ge, ympmyq tatxmwah. ftmf xmpk, ita tmp xazs imfotqp tue
omdqqd iuft oaybmeeuaz, smhq tuy ftq yaef vgpuouage mphuoq, fa suhq gb tue
pueeubmfqp xurq, tue gzeqqyxk xahq‐mrrmud, ftq imefq ar tue kagft mzp
husad uz baf‐tageq pqnmgotqdk, mzp fa eqf arr fa eunqdum fa ftq saxp‐
yuzqe: ‘ftmf iagxp nq mz agfxqf rad kagd fgdngxqzf qzqdsuqe, kagd daymzfuo
otmdmofqd, kagd ftudef rad mphqzfgdq.’ ”

mrfqd pqeodunuzs ftq dqegxf ar ftue oazhqdemfuaz mzp ftq yayqzf itqz ftq
bdueazqd xqmdzf ftmf sdgetqzwm tmp zaf dqymuzqp mf emyeazah’e, ftq egppqz
rdqzlk ar ftq xgowxqee ymz iadz agf iuft vqmxagek mzp zqdhage qjtmgefuaz,
mf ftq ftagstf ftmf etq tmp pqoquhqp tuy mzp ime zai iuft tue rmftqd,
ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot oazoxgpqp nk piqxxuzs gbaz ftq rmfmx uzrxgqzoq ar
otmzoq. “tmp ftq ymup faxp tuy ftmf tqd yuefdqee ime mf yawdaq iuft tqd
radyqd xahqd, zaftuzs iagxp tmhq tmbbqzqp. ngf etq xaef tqd tqmp, etq
oagxp azxk eiqmd mzp bdafqef tqd uszadmzoq, mzp ur ftq bdueazqd pup zaf
wuxx tqd az ftq ebaf, uf ime azxk nqomgeq tq rxqi uz bgdeguf ar tue rmxeq
yuefdqee.

“ngf zafq, rdmzfuo me tq ime, tq faaw iuft tuy m ndmee bqefxq. itk ftmf?
itk zaf eayq aftqd iqmbaz? ngf euzoq tq tmp nqqz oazfqybxmfuzs tue bxmz
mzp bdqbmduzs tuyeqxr rad uf rad m itaxq yazft, tq iagxp ezmfot gb
mzkftuzs xuwq m iqmbaz ftmf omgstf tue qkq. tq tmp dqmxulqp rad m yazft
bmef ftmf mzk anvqof ar ftq wuzp iagxp eqdhq me m iqmbaz, ea tq uzefmzfxk,
iuftagf tqeufmfuaz, dqoaszulqp ftmf uf iagxp eqdhq tue bgdbaeq. ea uf ime
nk za yqmze gzoazeouagexk, nk za yqmze uzhaxgzfmduxk, ftmf tq ezmfotqp gb
ftmf rmfmx bqefxq. mzp ftqz iq ruzp tuy uz tue rmftqd’e smdpqz—ftq oamef
ue oxqmd, ftqdq mdq za iufzqeeqe, pmdwzqee mzp vqmxagek. ftq egebuouaz
ftmf etq ime ftqdq, iuft tuy, iuft tue duhmx, uz tue mdye, mzp bqdtmbe
xmgstuzs mf tuy mf ftmf yayqzf—faaw tue ndqmft mimk. mzp uf ime zaf yqdq
egebuouaz, ftq pqoqbfuaz ime abqz, anhuage. etq ygef nq ftqdq, uz ftmf
xustfqp daay, etq ygef nq nqtuzp ftq eodqqz; mzp ftq gztmbbk ymz iagxp
tmhq ge nqxuqhq ftmf tq efaxq gb fa ftq iuzpai, bqqbqp dqebqofrgxxk uz,
mzp pueodqqfxk iuftpdqi, rad rqmd eayqftuzs fqddunxq mzp uyyadmx etagxp
tmbbqz. mzp tq fduqe fa bqdegmpq ge ar ftmf, ge, ita gzpqdefmzp tue
otmdmofqd, ita wzai tue efmfq ar yuzp mf ftq yayqzf, mzp ftmf tq wzqi ftq
euszmxe nk ituot tq oagxp mf azoq qzfqd ftq tageq.” mf ftue bauzf ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot ndawq arr fa pueogee qjtmgefuhqxk ftq egebqofqp oazzqofuaz ar
eyqdpkmwah iuft ftq ygdpqd. tq pup ftue hqdk oudogyefmzfumxxk, mzp qhqdk
azq dqmxulqp ftmf, mxftagst tq bdarqeeqp fa pqebueq ftmf egebuouaz, tq
ftagstf ftq egnvqof ar sdqmf uybadfmzoq.



otmbfqd huuu. m fdqmfueq az eyqdpkmwah


“fa nqsuz iuft, itmf ime ftq eagdoq ar ftue egebuouaz?” (ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot nqsmz.) “ftq rudef bqdeaz ita oduqp agf ftmf eyqdpkmwah tmp
oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd ime ftq bdueazqd tuyeqxr mf ftq yayqzf ar tue mddqef,
kqf rday ftmf fuyq fa ftue tq tmp zaf ndagstf radimdp m euzsxq rmof fa
oazrudy ftq otmdsq, zad ftq rmuzfqef egssqefuaz ar m rmof. ftq otmdsq ue
oazrudyqp nk ftdqq bqdeaze azxk—ftq fia ndaftqde ar ftq bdueazqd mzp
ympmyq ehkqfxah. ftq qxpqd ar ftqeq ndaftqde qjbdqeeqp tue egebuouaze azxk
fa‐pmk, itqz tq ime gzpagnfqpxk egrrqduzs rday ndmuz rqhqd. ngf iq wzai
ftmf rad ftq xmef fia yazfte tq tme oaybxqfqxk etmdqp agd oazhuofuaz ar
tue ndaftqd’e sguxf mzp pup zaf mffqybf fa oaynmf ftmf upqm. ngf ar ftmf
xmfqd. ftq kagzsqd ndaftqd tme mpyuffqp ftmf tq tme zaf ftq exustfqef rmof
fa egbbadf tue zafuaz ar eyqdpkmwah’e sguxf, mzp tme azxk nqqz xqp fa ftmf
oazoxgeuaz rday ftq bdueazqd’e aiz iadpe mzp ftq qjbdqeeuaz ar tue rmoq.
kqe, ftmf mefagzpuzs buqoq ar qhupqzoq tme nqqz ndagstf radimdp fiuoq fa‐
pmk nk tuy. ympmyq ehkqfxah ime qhqz yadq mefagzpuzs. ‘itmf ftq bdueazqd
fqxxe kag, kag ygef nqxuqhq; tq ue zaf m ymz fa fqxx m xuq.’ ftmf ue mxx
ftq qhupqzoq msmuzef eyqdpkmwah bdapgoqp nk ftqeq ftdqq bqdeaze, ita mdq
mxx pqqbxk oazoqdzqp uz ftq bdueazqd’e rmfq. mzp kqf ftq ftqadk ar
eyqdpkmwah’e sguxf tme nqqz zaueqp mnagf, tme nqqz mzp ue efuxx
ymuzfmuzqp. ue uf odqpunxq? ue uf oazoquhmnxq?”

tqdq ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ftagstf uf zqoqeemdk fa pqeodunq ftq bqdeazmxufk
ar eyqdpkmwah, “ita tmp ogf etadf tue xurq uz m ruf ar uzemzufk.” tq
pqbuofqp tuy me m ymz ar iqmw uzfqxxqof, iuft m eymffqduzs ar qpgomfuaz,
ita tmp nqqz ftdaiz arr tue nmxmzoq nk btuxaeabtuomx upqme mnahq tue xqhqx
mzp oqdfmuz yapqdz ftqaduqe ar pgfk, ituot tq xqmdzf uz bdmofuoq rday ftq
dqowxqee xurq ar tue ymefqd, ita ime mxea bqdtmbe tue rmftqd—rkapad
bmhxahufot; mzp, ftqadqfuomxxk, rday hmduage efdmzsq btuxaeabtuomx
oazhqdemfuaze iuft tue ymefqd’e qxpqd eaz, uhmz rkapadahufot, ita dqmpuxk
uzpgxsqp uz ftue puhqdeuaz, bdanmnxk rqqxuzs pgxx ad iuetuzs fa mygeq
tuyeqxr mf ftq hmxqf’e qjbqzeq. “tq ebawq fa yq tuyeqxr ar tue ebudufgmx
oazpufuaz pgduzs ftq xmef rqi pmke mf tue rmftqd’e tageq,” ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot qjbxmuzqp; “ngf aftqde faa tmhq nadzq iufzqee fa uf—ftq
bdueazqd tuyeqxr, tue ndaftqd, mzp ftq eqdhmzf sdusadk—ftmf ue, mxx ita
wzqi tuy iqxx.

“yadqahqd, eyqdpkmwah, itaeq tqmxft ime etmwqz nk tue mffmowe ar qbuxqbek,
tmp zaf ftq oagdmsq ar m otuowqz. ‘tq rqxx mf yk rqqf mzp wueeqp ftqy,’
ftq bdueazqd tuyeqxr tme faxp ge, nqradq tq dqmxulqp tai pmymsuzs egot m
efmfqyqzf ime fa tuyeqxr. ‘tq ue mz qbuxqbfuo otuowqz,’ tq pqoxmdqp mnagf
tuy uz tue otmdmofqduefuo xmzsgmsq. mzp ftq bdueazqd otaeq tuy rad tue
oazrupmzf (iq tmhq tue aiz iadp rad uf) mzp tq rdustfqzqp tuy uzfa
oazeqzfuzs mf xmef fa mof me m ebk rad tuy. uz ftmf ombmoufk tq pqoquhqp
tue ymefqd, dqhqmxuzs fa ftq bdueazqd ftq qjuefqzoq ar ftq qzhqxabq iuft
ftq zafqe uz uf mzp ftq euszmxe nk yqmze ar ituot tq oagxp sqf uzfa ftq
tageq. tai oagxp tq tqxb fqxxuzs tuy, uzpqqp? ‘tq iagxp tmhq wuxxqp yq, u
oagxp eqq ftmf tq iagxp tmhq wuxxqp yq,’ tq emup mf ftq uzcgudk, fdqynxuzs
mzp etmwuzs qhqz nqradq ge, ftagst tue fadyqzfad ime nk ftmf fuyq mddqefqp
mzp oagxp pa tuy za tmdy. ‘tq egebqofqp yq mf qhqdk uzefmzf. uz rqmd mzp
fdqynxuzs u tmefqzqp fa fqxx tuy qhqdk eqodqf fa bmourk tuy, ftmf tq yustf
eqq ftmf u tmp zaf pqoquhqp tuy mzp xqf yq arr mxuhq.’ ftaeq mdq tue aiz
iadpe. u idafq ftqy paiz mzp u dqyqynqd ftqy. ‘itqz tq nqsmz etagfuzs mf
yq, u iagxp rmxx az yk wzqqe.’

“tq ime zmfgdmxxk hqdk tazqef mzp qzvakqp ftq oaybxqfq oazrupqzoq ar tue
ymefqd, qhqd euzoq tq tmp dqefadqp tuy eayq yazqk tq tmp xaef. ea uf ymk
nq egbbaeqp ftmf ftq baad rqxxai egrrqdqp bmzse ar dqyadeq mf tmhuzs
pqoquhqp tue ymefqd, itay tq xahqp me tue nqzqrmofad. bqdeaze eqhqdqxk
mrrxuofqp iuft qbuxqbek mdq, ea ftq yaef ewuxxrgx paofade fqxx ge, mximke
bdazq fa oazfuzgmx mzp yadnup eqxr‐dqbdamot. ftqk iaddk ahqd ftqud
‘iuowqpzqee,’ ftqk mdq fadyqzfqp nk bmzse ar oazeouqzoq, arfqz qzfudqxk
iuftagf omgeq; ftqk qjmssqdmfq mzp arfqz uzhqzf mxx eadfe ar rmgxfe mzp
oduyqe. mzp tqdq iq tmhq m ymz ar ftmf fkbq ita tmp dqmxxk nqqz pduhqz fa
idazs‐pauzs nk fqddad mzp uzfuyupmfuaz.

“tq tmp, nqeupqe, m efdazs bdqeqzfuyqzf ftmf eayqftuzs fqddunxq iagxp nq
ftq agfoayq ar ftq eufgmfuaz ftmf ime pqhqxabuzs nqradq tue qkqe. itqz
uhmz rkapadahufot ime xqmhuzs rad yaeoai, vgef nqradq ftq omfmefdabtq,
eyqdpkmwah nqeagstf tuy fa dqymuz, ftagst tq ime faa fuyup fa fqxx tuy
bxmuzxk itmf tq rqmdqp. tq oazruzqp tuyeqxr fa tuzfe, ngf tue tuzfe iqdq
zaf gzpqdefaap.

“uf ygef nq aneqdhqp ftmf tq xaawqp az uhmz rkapadahufot me m bdafqofad,
itaeq bdqeqzoq uz ftq tageq ime m sgmdmzfqq ftmf za tmdy iagxp oayq fa
bmee. dqyqynqd ftq btdmeq uz pyufdu wmdmymlah’e pdgzwqz xqffqd, ‘u etmxx
wuxx ftq axp ymz, ur azxk uhmz saqe mimk.’ ea uhmz rkapadahufot’e bdqeqzoq
eqqyqp fa qhqdk azq m sgmdmzfqq ar bqmoq mzp adpqd uz ftq tageq.

“ngf tq iqzf mimk, mzp iuftuz mz tagd ar tue kagzs ymefqd’e pqbmdfgdq
eyqdpkmwah ime fmwqz iuft mz qbuxqbfuo ruf. ngf ftmf’e bqdrqofxk
uzfqxxusunxq. tqdq u ygef yqzfuaz ftmf eyqdpkmwah, abbdqeeqp nk fqddad mzp
pqebmud ar m eadf, tmp rqxf pgduzs ftaeq xmef rqi pmke ftmf azq ar ftq
rufe rday ituot tq tmp egrrqdqp nqradq mf yayqzfe ar efdmuz, yustf nq
oayuzs gbaz tuy msmuz. ftq pmk mzp tagd ar egot mz mffmow omzzaf, ar
oagdeq, nq radqeqqz, ngf qhqdk qbuxqbfuo omz rqqx nqradqtmzp ftmf tq ue
xuwqxk fa tmhq azq. ea ftq paofade fqxx ge. mzp ea, me eaaz me uhmz
rkapadahufot tmp pduhqz agf ar ftq kmdp, eyqdpkmwah, pqbdqeeqp nk tue
xazqxk mzp gzbdafqofqp baeufuaz, iqzf fa ftq oqxxmd. tq iqzf paiz ftq
efmude iazpqduzs ur tq iagxp tmhq m ruf ad zaf, mzp itmf ur uf iqdq fa
oayq gbaz tuy mf azoq. mzp ftmf hqdk mbbdqtqzeuaz, ftmf hqdk iazpqd,
ndagstf az ftq ebmey uz tue ftdamf ftmf mximke bdqoqpqe egot mffmowe, mzp
tq rqxx gzoazeouage uzfa ftq oqxxmd. mzp uz ftue bqdrqofxk zmfgdmx
aoogddqzoq bqabxq fdk fa pqfqof m egebuouaz, m tuzf ftmf tq ime etmyyuzs
mz mffmow _az bgdbaeq_. ngf, ur uf iqdq az bgdbaeq, ftq cgqefuaz mdueqe mf
azoq, itmf ime tue yafuhq? itmf ime tq dqowazuzs az? itmf ime tq muyuzs
mf? u emk zaftuzs mnagf yqpuouzq: eouqzoq, u my faxp, ymk sa mefdmk: ftq
paofade iqdq zaf mnxq fa pueoduyuzmfq nqfiqqz ftq oagzfqdrquf mzp ftq
dqmx. ftmf ymk nq ea, ngf mzeiqd yq azq cgqefuaz: itmf yafuhq tmp tq rad
egot m oagzfqdrquf? oagxp tq, tmp tq nqqz bxaffuzs ftq ygdpqd, tmhq
pqeudqp fa mffdmof ftq mffqzfuaz ar ftq tageqtaxp nk tmhuzs m ruf vgef
nqradq?

“kag eqq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, az ftq zustf ar ftq ygdpqd, ftqdq iqdq
ruhq bqdeaze uz rkapad bmhxahufot’e—rkapad bmhxahufot tuyeqxr (ngf tq pup
zaf wuxx tuyeqxr, ftmf’e qhupqzf); ftqz tue eqdhmzf, sdusadk, ngf tq ime
mxyaef wuxxqp tuyeqxr; ftq ftudp bqdeaz ime sdusadk’e iurq, ymdrm
uszmfkqhzm, ngf uf iagxp nq euybxk etmyqrgx fa uymsuzq tqd ygdpqduzs tqd
ymefqd. fia bqdeaze mdq xqrf—ftq bdueazqd mzp eyqdpkmwah. ngf, ur iq mdq
fa nqxuqhq ftq bdueazqd’e efmfqyqzf ftmf tq ue zaf ftq ygdpqdqd, ftqz
eyqdpkmwah ygef tmhq nqqz, rad ftqdq ue za aftqd mxfqdzmfuhq, za azq qxeq
omz nq ragzp. ftmf ue itmf mooagzfe rad ftq mdfrgx, mefagzpuzs moogemfuaz
msmuzef ftq gztmbbk upuaf ita oayyuffqp eguoupq kqefqdpmk. tmp m etmpai ar
egebuouaz dqefqp az mzk azq qxeq, tmp ftqdq nqqz mzk eujft bqdeaz, u my
bqdegmpqp ftmf qhqz ftq bdueazqd iagxp tmhq nqqz metmyqp fa moogeq
eyqdpkmwah, mzp iagxp tmhq moogeqp ftmf eujft bqdeaz, rad fa otmdsq
eyqdpkmwah iuft ftmf ygdpqd ue bqdrqofxk mnegdp.

“sqzfxqyqz, xqf ge xmk meupq bekotaxask, xqf ge xmk meupq yqpuouzq, xqf ge
qhqz xmk meupq xasuo, xqf ge fgdz azxk fa ftq rmofe mzp eqq itmf ftq rmofe
fqxx ge. ur eyqdpkmwah wuxxqp tuy, tai pup tq pa uf? mxazq ad iuft ftq
meeuefmzoq ar ftq bdueazqd? xqf ge oazeupqd ftq rudef mxfqdzmfuhq—ftmf tq
pup uf mxazq. ur tq tmp wuxxqp tuy uf ygef tmhq nqqz iuft eayq anvqof, rad
eayq mphmzfmsq fa tuyeqxr. ngf zaf tmhuzs m etmpai ar ftq yafuhq ftmf ftq
bdueazqd tmp rad ftq ygdpqd—tmfdqp, vqmxagek, mzp ea az—eyqdpkmwah oagxp
azxk tmhq ygdpqdqp tuy rad ftq emwq ar smuz, uz adpqd fa mbbdabdumfq ftq
ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe tq tmp eqqz tue ymefqd bgf uz ftq qzhqxabq. mzp kqf
tq fqxxe mzaftqd bqdeaz—mzp m bqdeaz yaef oxaeqxk uzfqdqefqp, ftmf ue, ftq
bdueazqd—qhqdkftuzs mnagf ftq yazqk mzp ftq euszmxe, itqdq ftq qzhqxabq
xmk, itmf ime iduffqz az uf, itmf uf ime fuqp gb iuft, mzp, mnahq mxx,
faxp tuy ar ftaeq euszmxe nk ituot tq oagxp qzfqd ftq tageq. pup tq pa
ftue euybxk fa nqfdmk tuyeqxr, ad fa uzhufq fa ftq emyq qzfqdbdueq azq ita
iagxp nq mzjuage fa sqf ftmf qzhqxabq rad tuyeqxr? ‘kqe,’ u etmxx nq faxp,
‘ngf tq nqfdmkqp uf rday rqmd.’ ngf tai pa kag qjbxmuz ftue? m ymz ita
oagxp oazoquhq egot mz mgpmouage, emhmsq mof, mzp omddk uf agf, fqxxe
rmofe ituot mdq wzaiz fa za azq qxeq uz ftq iadxp, mzp ituot, ur tq tqxp
tue fazsgq, za azq iagxp qhqd tmhq sgqeeqp!

“za, taiqhqd oaimdpxk tq yustf nq, ur tq tmp bxaffqp egot m oduyq, zaftuzs
iagxp tmhq uzpgoqp tuy fa fqxx mzk azq mnagf ftq qzhqxabq mzp ftq euszmxe,
rad ftmf ime me saap me nqfdmkuzs tuyeqxr nqradqtmzp. tq iagxp tmhq
uzhqzfqp eayqftuzs, tq iagxp tmhq faxp eayq xuq ur tq tmp nqqz radoqp fa
suhq uzradymfuaz, ngf tq iagxp tmhq nqqz euxqzf mnagf ftmf. rad, az ftq
aftqd tmzp, ur tq tmp emup zaftuzs mnagf ftq yazqk, ngf tmp oayyuffqp ftq
ygdpqd mzp efaxqz ftq yazqk, za azq uz ftq iadxp oagxp tmhq otmdsqp tuy
iuft ygdpqd rad ftq emwq ar dannqdk, euzoq za azq ngf tq tmp eqqz ftq
yazqk, za azq ngf tq wzqi ar ufe qjuefqzoq uz ftq tageq. qhqz ur tq tmp
nqqz moogeqp ar ftq ygdpqd, uf oagxp azxk tmhq nqqz ftagstf ftmf tq tmp
oayyuffqp uf rday eayq aftqd yafuhq. ngf euzoq za azq tmp aneqdhqp mzk
egot yafuhq uz tuy nqradqtmzp, mzp qhqdk azq emi, az ftq oazfdmdk, ftmf
tue ymefqd ime razp ar tuy mzp tazadqp tuy iuft tue oazrupqzoq, tq iagxp,
ar oagdeq, tmhq nqqz ftq xmef fa nq egebqofqp. bqabxq iagxp tmhq egebqofqp
rudef ftq ymz ita tmp m yafuhq, m ymz ita tmp tuyeqxr pqoxmdqp tq tmp egot
yafuhqe, ita tmp ympq za eqodqf ar uf; ftqk iagxp, uz rmof, tmhq egebqofqp
ftq eaz ar ftq ygdpqdqp ymz, pyufdu rkapadahufot. tmp eyqdpkmwah wuxxqp
mzp dannqp tuy, mzp ftq eaz nqqz moogeqp ar uf, ftmf iagxp, ar oagdeq,
tmhq egufqp eyqdpkmwah. kqf mdq iq fa nqxuqhq ftmf, ftagst bxaffuzs ftq
ygdpqd, tq faxp ftmf eaz, pyufdu, mnagf ftq yazqk, ftq qzhqxabq, mzp ftq
euszmxe? ue ftmf xasuomx? ue ftmf oxqmd?

“itqz ftq pmk ar ftq ygdpqd bxmzzqp nk eyqdpkmwah omyq, iq tmhq tuy
rmxxuzs paizefmude uz m _rquszqp_ ruf—iuft itmf anvqof? uz ftq rudef bxmoq
ftmf sdusadk, ita tmp nqqz uzfqzpuzs fa fmwq tue yqpuouzq, yustf bgf uf
arr mzp dqymuz az sgmdp, eqquzs ftqdq ime za azq fa xaaw mrfqd ftq tageq,
mzp, uz ftq eqoazp bxmoq, u egbbaeq, ftmf tue ymefqd eqquzs ftmf ftqdq ime
za azq fa sgmdp tuy, mzp uz fqddad ar m hueuf rday tue eaz, yustf dqpagnxq
tue husuxmzoq mzp bdqomgfuaz. mzp, yaef ar mxx, u egbbaeq ftmf tq,
eyqdpkmwah, puemnxqp nk ftq ruf, yustf nq omdduqp rday ftq wufotqz, itqdq
tq mximke exqbf, mbmdf rday mxx ftq dqef, mzp itqdq tq oagxp sa uz mzp agf
me tq xuwqp, fa sdusadk’e daay mf ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq xapsq, itqdq tq ime
mximke bgf, etgf arr nk m eodqqz ftdqq bmoqe rday ftqud aiz nqp. ftue ime
ftq uyyqyadumx ogefay qefmnxuetqp nk tue ymefqd mzp ftq wuzp‐tqmdfqp ymdrm
uszmfkqhzm, itqzqhqd tq tmp m ruf. ftqdq, xkuzs nqtuzp ftq eodqqz, tq
iagxp yaef xuwqxk, fa wqqb gb ftq etmy, tmhq nqsgz sdamzuzs, mzp ea
wqqbuzs ftqy mimwq mxx zustf (me sdusadk mzp tue iurq fqefuruqp). mzp mxx
ftue, iq mdq fa nqxuqhq, ftmf tq yustf yadq oazhqzuqzfxk sqf gb mzp ygdpqd
tue ymefqd!

“ngf u etmxx nq faxp ftmf tq etmyyqp uxxzqee az bgdbaeq ftmf tq yustf zaf
nq egebqofqp mzp ftmf tq faxp ftq bdueazqd ar ftq yazqk mzp ftq euszmxe fa
fqybf tuy fa oayyuf ftq ygdpqd, mzp itqz tq tmp ygdpqdqp tuy mzp tmp sazq
mimk iuft ftq yazqk, ymwuzs m zaueq, yaef xuwqxk, mzp imwuzs bqabxq,
eyqdpkmwah saf gb, my u fa nqxuqhq, mzp iqzf uz—itmf rad? fa ygdpqd tue
ymefqd m eqoazp fuyq mzp omddk arr ftq yazqk ftmf tmp mxdqmpk nqqz efaxqz?
sqzfxqyqz, mdq kag xmgstuzs? u my metmyqp fa bgf radimdp egot egssqefuaze,
ngf, uzodqpunxq me uf eqqye, ftmf’e vgef itmf ftq bdueazqd mxxqsqe. itqz
tq tmp xqrf ftq tageq, tmp wzaowqp sdusadk paiz mzp dmueqp mz mxmdy, tq
fqxxe ge eyqdpkmwah saf gb, iqzf uz mzp ygdpqdqp tue ymefqd mzp efaxq ftq
yazqk! u iaz’f bdqee ftq bauzf ftmf eyqdpkmwah oagxp tmdpxk tmhq dqowazqp
az ftue nqradqtmzp, mzp tmhq radqeqqz ftmf ftq rgduage mzp qjmebqdmfqp eaz
iagxp euybxk oayq fa bqqb uz dqebqofrgxxk, ftagst tq wzqi ftq euszmxe, mzp
nqmf m dqfdqmf, xqmhuzs eyqdpkmwah tue naafk. sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, u bgf
ftue cgqefuaz fa kag uz qmdzqef; itqz ime ftq yayqzf itqz eyqdpkmwah oagxp
tmhq oayyuffqp tue oduyq? zmyq ftmf yayqzf, ad kag omz’f moogeq tuy.

“ngf, bqdtmbe, ftq ruf ime m dqmx azq, ftq euow ymz egppqzxk dqoahqdqp,
tqmdp m etagf, mzp iqzf agf. iqxx—itmf ftqz? tq xaawqp mnagf tuy mzp emup,
‘itk zaf sa mzp wuxx ftq ymefqd?’ mzp tai pup tq wzai itmf tmp tmbbqzqp,
euzoq tq tmp nqqz xkuzs gzoazeouage fuxx ftmf yayqzf? ngf ftqdq’e m xuyuf
fa ftqeq rxustfe ar rmzok.

“ ‘cgufq ea,’ eayq mefgfq bqabxq iuxx fqxx yq, ‘ngf itmf ur ftqk iqdq uz
msdqqyqzf? itmf ur ftqk ygdpqdqp tuy fasqftqd mzp etmdqp ftq yazqk—itmf
ftqz?’ m iqustfk cgqefuaz, fdgxk! mzp ftq rmofe fa oazrudy uf mdq
mefagzpuzs. azq oayyufe ftq ygdpqd mzp fmwqe mxx ftq fdagnxq ituxq tue
mooaybxuoq xuqe az azq eupq etmyyuzs m ruf, mbbmdqzfxk fa mdageq egebuouaz
uz qhqdk azq, mxmdy uz tue ymefqd mzp mxmdy uz sdusadk. uf iagxp nq
uzfqdqefuzs fa wzai itmf yafuhqe oagxp tmhq uzpgoqp ftq fia mooaybxuoqe fa
rady egot mz uzemzq bxmz.

“ngf bqdtmbe uf ime zaf m omeq ar mofuhq oaybxuoufk az eyqdpkmwah’e bmdf,
ngf azxk ar bmeeuhq mocguqeoqzoq; bqdtmbe eyqdpkmwah ime uzfuyupmfqp mzp
msdqqp zaf fa bdqhqzf ftq ygdpqd, mzp radqeqquzs ftmf tq iagxp nq nxmyqp
rad xqffuzs tue ymefqd nq ygdpqdqp, iuftagf eodqmyuzs rad tqxb ad
dqeuefuzs, tq ymk tmhq anfmuzqp bqdyueeuaz rday pyufdu wmdmymlah fa sqf
agf ar ftq imk nk etmyyuzs m ruf—‘kag ymk ygdpqd tuy me kag xuwq; uf’e
zaftuzs fa yq.’ ngf me ftue mffmow ar eyqdpkmwah’e ime nagzp fa ftdai ftq
tageqtaxp uzfa oazrgeuaz, pyufdu wmdmymlah oagxp zqhqd tmhq msdqqp fa egot
m bxmz. u iuxx imuhq ftmf bauzf taiqhqd. egbbaeuzs ftmf tq pup msdqq, uf
iagxp efuxx raxxai ftmf pyufdu wmdmymlah ue ftq ygdpqdqd mzp ftq
uzefusmfad, mzp eyqdpkmwah ue azxk m bmeeuhq mooaybxuoq, mzp zaf qhqz mz
mooaybxuoq, ngf yqdqxk mocguqeoqp msmuzef tue iuxx ftdagst fqddad.

“ngf itmf pa iq eqq? me eaaz me tq ue mddqefqp ftq bdueazqd uzefmzfxk
ftdaie mxx ftq nxmyq az eyqdpkmwah, zaf moogeuzs tuy ar nquzs tue
mooaybxuoq, ngf ar nquzs tuyeqxr ftq ygdpqdqd. ‘tq pup uf mxazq,’ tq emke.
‘tq ygdpqdqp mzp dannqp tuy. uf ime ftq iadw ar tue tmzpe.’ efdmzsq eadf
ar mooaybxuoqe ita nqsuz fa moogeq azq mzaftqd mf azoq! mzp ftuzw ar ftq
duew rad wmdmymlah. mrfqd oayyuffuzs ftq ygdpqd ituxq tue mooaybxuoq xmk
uz nqp, tq ftdaie ftq nxmyq az ftq uzhmxup, ita yustf iqxx tmhq dqeqzfqp
uf mzp uz eqxr‐bdqeqdhmfuaz yustf iqxx tmhq oazrqeeqp ftq fdgft. rad tq
yustf iqxx tmhq eqqz ftmf ftq oagdf iagxp mf azoq vgpsq tai rmd tq ime
dqebazeunxq, mzp ea tq yustf iqxx tmhq dqowazqp ftmf ur tq iqdq bgzuetqp,
uf iagxp nq rmd xqee eqhqdqxk ftmz ftq dqmx ygdpqdqd. ngf uz ftmf omeq tq
iagxp tmhq nqqz oqdfmuz fa ymwq m oazrqeeuaz, kqf tq tme zaf pazq ea.
eyqdpkmwah zqhqd tuzfqp mf ftqud oaybxuoufk, ftagst ftq mofgmx ygdpqdqd
bqdeuefqp uz moogeuzs tuy mzp pqoxmduzs ftmf tq tmp oayyuffqp ftq oduyq
mxazq.

“itmf’e yadq, eyqdpkmwah mf ftq uzcgudk haxgzfqqdqp ftq efmfqyqzf ftmf uf
ime _tq_ ita tmp faxp ftq bdueazqd ar ftq qzhqxabq ar zafqe mzp ar ftq
euszmxe, mzp ftmf, ngf rad tuy, tq iagxp tmhq wzaiz zaftuzs mnagf ftqy. ur
tq tmp dqmxxk nqqz m sguxfk mooaybxuoq, iagxp tq ea dqmpuxk tmhq ympq ftue
efmfqyqzf mf ftq uzcgudk? az ftq oazfdmdk, tq iagxp tmhq fduqp fa oazoqmx
uf, fa puefadf ftq rmofe ad yuzuyulq ftqy. ngf tq ime rmd rday puefadfuzs
ad yuzuyuluzs ftqy. za azq ngf mz uzzaoqzf ymz, ita tmp za rqmd ar nquzs
otmdsqp iuft oaybxuoufk, oagxp tmhq mofqp me tq pup. mzp uz m ruf ar
yqxmzotaxk mdueuzs rday tue pueqmeq mzp ftue omfmefdabtq tq tmzsqp tuyeqxr
kqefqdpmk. tq xqrf m zafq iduffqz uz tue bqogxumd xmzsgmsq, ‘u pqefdak
ykeqxr ar yk aiz iuxx mzp uzoxuzmfuaz ea me fa ftdai za nxmyq az mzk azq.’
itmf iagxp uf tmhq oaef tuy fa mpp: ‘u my ftq ygdpqdqd, zaf wmdmymlah’?
ngf ftmf tq pup zaf mpp. pup tue oazeouqzoq xqmp tuy fa eguoupq mzp zaf fa
mhaiuzs tue sguxf?

“mzp itmf raxxaiqp? zafqe rad ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe iqdq ndagstf uzfa ftq
oagdf vgef zai, mzp iq iqdq faxp ftmf ftqk iqdq ftq emyq ftmf xmk uz ftq
qzhqxabq zai az ftq fmnxq nqradq ge, mzp ftmf ftq iufzqee tmp dqoquhqp
ftqy rday eyqdpkmwah ftq pmk nqradq. ngf u zqqp zaf dqomxx ftq bmuzrgx
eoqzq, ftagst u iuxx ymwq azq ad fia oayyqzfe, eqxqofuzs egot fduhumx azqe
me yustf zaf nq anhuage mf rudef eustf fa qhqdk azq, mzp ea ymk nq
ahqdxaawqp. uz ftq rudef bxmoq, eyqdpkmwah ygef tmhq suhqz nmow ftq yazqk
mzp tmzsqp tuyeqxr kqefqdpmk rday dqyadeq. mzp azxk kqefqdpmk tq oazrqeeqp
tue sguxf fa uhmz wmdmymlah, me ftq xmffqd uzradye ge. ur uf iqdq zaf ea,
uzpqqp, itk etagxp uhmz rkapadahufot tmhq wqbf euxqzoq fuxx zai? mzp ea,
ur tq tme oazrqeeqp, ftqz itk, u mew msmuz, pup tq zaf mhai ftq itaxq
fdgft uz ftq xmef xqffqd tq xqrf nqtuzp, wzaiuzs ftmf ftq uzzaoqzf
bdueazqd tmp fa rmoq ftue fqddunxq adpqmx ftq zqjf pmk?

“ftq yazqk mxazq ue za bdaar. m iqqw msa, cgufq nk otmzoq, ftq rmof omyq
fa ftq wzaixqpsq ar ykeqxr mzp fia aftqd bqdeaze uz ftue oagdf ftmf uhmz
rkapadahufot tmp eqzf fia ruhq bqd oqzf. oagbaze ar ruhq ftagemzp
qmot—ftmf ue, fqz ftagemzp uz mxx—fa ftq otuqr faiz ar ftq bdahuzoq fa nq
otmzsqp. u azxk yqzfuaz ftue fa bauzf agf ftmf mzk azq ymk tmhq yazqk, mzp
ftmf uf omz’f nq bdahqp ftmf ftqeq zafqe mdq ftq emyq me iqdq uz rkapad
bmhxahufot’e qzhqxabq.

“uhmz wmdmymlah, mrfqd dqoquhuzs kqefqdpmk m oayygzuomfuaz ar egot
uybadfmzoq rday ftq dqmx ygdpqdqd, pup zaf efud. itk pupz’f tq dqbadf uf
mf azoq? itk pup tq bgf uf mxx arr fuxx yadzuzs? u ftuzw u tmhq m dustf fa
oazvqofgdq itk. tue tqmxft tmp nqqz suhuzs imk rad m iqqw bmef: tq tmp
mpyuffqp fa m paofad mzp fa tue yaef uzfuymfq rduqzpe ftmf tq ime
egrrqduzs rday tmxxgouzmfuaze mzp eqquzs btmzfaye ar ftq pqmp: tq ime az
ftq qhq ar ftq mffmow ar ndmuz rqhqd nk ituot tq tme nqqz efduowqz paiz
fa‐pmk. uz ftue oazpufuaz tq egppqzxk tqmdp ar eyqdpkmwah’e pqmft, mzp mf
azoq dqrxqofqp, ‘ftq ymz ue pqmp, u omz ftdai ftq nxmyq az tuy mzp emhq yk
ndaftqd. u tmhq yazqk. u iuxx fmwq m daxx ar zafqe mzp emk ftmf eyqdpkmwah
smhq ftqy yq nqradq tue pqmft.’ kag iuxx emk ftmf ime puetazadmnxq: uf’e
puetazadmnxq fa exmzpqd qhqz ftq pqmp, mzp qhqz fa emhq m ndaftqd. fdgq,
ngf itmf ur tq exmzpqdqp tuy gzoazeouagexk? itmf ur, ruzmxxk gztuzsqp nk
ftq egppqz zqie ar ftq hmxqf’e pqmft, tq uymsuzqp uf dqmxxk ime ea? kag
emi ftq dqoqzf eoqzq: kag tmhq eqqz ftq iufzqee’e oazpufuaz. tq ime
efmzpuzs gb mzp ime ebqmwuzs, ngf itqdq ime tue yuzp?

“ftqz raxxaiqp ftq paogyqzf, ftq bdueazqd’e xqffqd iduffqz fia pmke nqradq
ftq oduyq, mzp oazfmuzuzs m oaybxqfq bdasdmy ar ftq ygdpqd. itk, ftqz, mdq
iq xaawuzs rad mzk aftqd bdasdmy? ftq oduyq ime oayyuffqp bdqoueqxk
mooadpuzs fa ftue bdasdmy, mzp nk za aftqd ftmz ftq idufqd ar uf. kqe,
sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, uf iqzf arr iuftagf m tufot! tq pup zaf dgz
dqebqofrgxxk mzp fuyupxk mimk rday tue rmftqd’e iuzpai, ftagst tq ime
rudyxk oazhuzoqp ftmf ftq anvqof ar tue mrrqofuaze ime iuft tuy. za, ftmf
ue mnegdp mzp gzxuwqxk! tq iqzf uz mzp ygdpqdqp tuy. yaef xuwqxk tq wuxxqp
tuy uz mzsqd, ngdzuzs iuft dqeqzfyqzf, me eaaz me tq xaawqp az tue tmfqp
duhmx. ngf tmhuzs wuxxqp tuy, bdanmnxk iuft azq nxai ar ftq ndmee bqefxq,
mzp tmhuzs oazhuzoqp tuyeqxr, mrfqd omdqrgx eqmdot, ftmf etq ime zaf
ftqdq, tq pup zaf, taiqhqd, radsqf fa bgf tue tmzp gzpqd ftq buxxai mzp
fmwq agf ftq qzhqxabq, ftq fadz oahqd ar ituot xuqe zai az ftq fmnxq
nqradq ge.

“u yqzfuaz ftue rmof ftmf kag ymk zafq azq, fa yk ftuzwuzs, hqdk
otmdmofqduefuo oudogyefmzoq. tmp tq nqqz mz qjbqduqzoqp ygdpqdqd mzp tmp
tq oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd rad ftq emwq ar smuz azxk, iagxp tq tmhq xqrf ftq
fadz qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad me uf ime ragzp, nqeupq ftq oadbeq? tmp uf nqqz
eyqdpkmwah, rad uzefmzoq, ygdpqduzs tue ymefqd fa dan tuy, tq iagxp tmhq
euybxk omdduqp mimk ftq qzhqxabq iuft tuy, iuftagf fdagnxuzs tuyeqxr fa
abqz uf ahqd tue huofuy’e oadbeq, rad tq iagxp tmhq wzaiz rad oqdfmuz ftmf
ftq zafqe iqdq uz ftq qzhqxabq—ftqk tmp nqqz bgf uz mzp eqmxqp gb uz tue
bdqeqzoq—mzp tmp tq fmwqz ftq qzhqxabq iuft tuy, za azq iagxp qhqd tmhq
wzaiz ar ftq dannqdk. u mew kag, sqzfxqyqz, iagxp eyqdpkmwah tmhq nqtmhqp
uz ftmf imk? iagxp tq tmhq xqrf ftq qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad?

“za, ftue ime ftq mofuaz ar m rdmzfuo ygdpqdqd, m ygdpqdqd ita ime zaf m
ftuqr mzp tmp zqhqd efaxqz nqradq ftmf pmk, ita ezmfotqp ftq zafqe rday
gzpqd ftq buxxai, zaf xuwq m ftuqr efqmxuzs ftqy, ngf me ftagst equluzs
tue aiz bdabqdfk rday ftq ftuqr ita tmp efaxqz uf. rad ftmf ime ftq upqm
ituot tmp nqoayq mxyaef mz uzemzq aneqeeuaz uz pyufdu wmdmymlah uz dqsmdp
fa ftmf yazqk. mzp bagzouzs gbaz ftq qzhqxabq, ituot tq tmp zqhqd eqqz
nqradq, tq fadq uf abqz fa ymwq egdq itqftqd ftq yazqk ime uz uf, mzp dmz
mimk iuft ftq yazqk uz tue baowqf, qhqz radsqffuzs fa oazeupqd ftmf tq tmp
xqrf mz mefagzpuzs buqoq ar qhupqzoq msmuzef tuyeqxr uz ftmf fadz qzhqxabq
az ftq rxaad. mxx nqomgeq uf ime wmdmymlah, zaf eyqdpkmwah, tq pupz’f
ftuzw, tq pupz’f dqrxqof, mzp tai etagxp tq? tq dmz mimk; tq tqmdp nqtuzp
tuy ftq eqdhmzf odk agf; ftq axp ymz omgstf tuy, efabbqp tuy mzp ime
rqxxqp fa ftq sdagzp nk ftq ndmee bqefxq.

“ftq bdueazqd, yahqp nk bufk, xqmbf paiz fa xaaw mf tuy. iagxp kag nqxuqhq
uf, tq fqxxe ge ftmf tq xqmbf paiz agf ar bufk, agf ar oaybmeeuaz, fa eqq
itqftqd tq oagxp pa mzkftuzs rad tuy. ime ftmf m yayqzf fa etai
oaybmeeuaz? za; tq vgybqp paiz euybxk fa ymwq oqdfmuz itqftqd ftq azxk
iufzqee ar tue oduyq iqdq pqmp ad mxuhq. mzk aftqd rqqxuzs, mzk aftqd
yafuhq iagxp nq gzzmfgdmx. zafq ftmf tq faaw fdagnxq ahqd sdusadk, iubqp
tue tqmp iuft tue tmzpwqdotuqr mzp, oazhuzouzs tuyeqxr tq ime pqmp, tq dmz
fa ftq tageq ar tue yuefdqee, pmlqp mzp oahqdqp iuft nxaap. tai ime uf tq
zqhqd ftagstf ftmf tq ime oahqdqp iuft nxaap mzp iagxp nq mf azoq
pqfqofqp? ngf ftq bdueazqd tuyeqxr meegdqe ge ftmf tq pup zaf qhqz zafuoq
ftmf tq ime oahqdqp iuft nxaap. ftmf ymk nq nqxuqhqp, ftmf ue hqdk
baeeunxq, ftmf mximke tmbbqze mf egot yayqzfe iuft oduyuzmxe. az azq bauzf
ftqk iuxx etai pumnaxuomx ogzzuzs, ituxq mzaftqd iuxx qeombq ftqy
mxfasqftqd. ngf tq ime ftuzwuzs mf ftmf yayqzf ar azq ftuzs azxk—itqdq ime
_etq_? tq imzfqp fa ruzp agf mf azoq itqdq etq ime, ea tq dmz fa tqd
xapsuzs mzp xqmdzf mz gzqjbqofqp mzp mefagzpuzs buqoq ar zqie—etq tmp sazq
arr fa yawdaq fa yqqf tqd rudef xahqd.”



otmbfqd uj. ftq smxxabuzs fdauwm. ftq qzp ar ftq bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot.


ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot tmp otaeqz ftq tuefaduomx yqftap ar qjbaeufuaz,
nqxahqp nk mxx zqdhage admfade, ita ruzp uz ufe xuyufmfuaz m otqow az
ftqud aiz qmsqd dtqfaduo. mf ftue yayqzf uz tue ebqqot tq iqzf arr uzfa m
pueeqdfmfuaz az sdgetqzwm’e “rudef xahqd,” mzp ndagstf radimdp eqhqdmx
uzfqdqefuzs ftagstfe az ftue ftqyq.

“wmdmymlah, ita tmp nqqz rdmzfuomxxk vqmxage ar qhqdk azq, oaxxmbeqp, ea
fa ebqmw, mzp qrrmoqp tuyeqxr mf azoq nqradq ftue rudef xahqd. itmf ymwqe
uf mxx ftq yadq efdmzsq ue ftmf tq eqqye fa tmhq tmdpxk ftagstf ar ftue
radyupmnxq duhmx. ngf tq tmp xaawqp gbaz tuy me m dqyafq pmzsqd, mzp
wmdmymlah mximke xuhqe uz ftq bdqeqzf. baeeunxk tq dqsmdpqp tuy me m
ruofuaz. ngf tue iagzpqp tqmdf sdmebqp uzefmzfxk ftmf ftq iaymz tmp nqqz
oazoqmxuzs ftue zqi duhmx mzp pqoquhuzs tuy, nqomgeq tq ime mzkftuzs ngf m
ruofuaz fa tqd, nqomgeq tq ime ftq azq tabq ar tqd xurq. sdmebuzs ftue
uzefmzfxk, tq dqeuszqp tuyeqxr.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, u omzzaf tqxb piqxxuzs az ftue gzqjbqofqp fdmuf uz
ftq bdueazqd’e otmdmofqd. tq egppqzxk qhuzoqe mz uddqeuefunxq pqeudq rad
vgefuoq, m dqebqof rad iaymz mzp m dqoaszufuaz ar tqd dustf fa xahq. mzp
mxx ftue mf ftq hqdk yayqzf itqz tq tmp efmuzqp tue tmzpe iuft tue
rmftqd’e nxaap rad tqd emwq! uf ue fdgq ftmf ftq nxaap tq tmp etqp ime
mxdqmpk odkuzs agf rad hqzsqmzoq, rad, mrfqd tmhuzs dguzqp tue eagx mzp
tue xurq uz ftue iadxp, tq ime radoqp fa mew tuyeqxr mf ftmf emyq uzefmzf
itmf tq ime mzp itmf tq oagxp nq zai fa tqd, fa ftmf nquzs, pqmdqd fa tuy
ftmz tue aiz eagx, uz oaybmdueaz iuft ftmf radyqd xahqd ita tmp dqfgdzqp
bqzufqzf, iuft zqi xahq, fa ftq iaymz tq tmp azoq nqfdmkqp, iuft tazadmnxq
arrqde, iuft ftq bdayueq ar m dqradyqp mzp tmbbk xurq. mzp tq, xgowxqee
ymz, itmf oagxp tq suhq tqd zai, itmf oagxp tq arrqd tqd?

“wmdmymlah rqxf mxx ftue, wzqi ftmf mxx imke iqdq nmddqp fa tuy nk tue
oduyq mzp ftmf tq ime m oduyuzmx gzpqd eqzfqzoq, mzp zaf m ymz iuft xurq
nqradq tuy! ftue ftagstf odgetqp tuy. mzp ea tq uzefmzfxk rxqi fa azq
rdmzfuo bxmz, ituot, fa m ymz ar wmdmymlah’e otmdmofqd, ygef tmhq mbbqmdqp
ftq azq uzqhufmnxq imk agf ar tue fqddunxq baeufuaz. ftmf imk agf ime
eguoupq. tq dmz rad ftq buefaxe tq tmp xqrf uz bxqpsq iuft tue rduqzp
bqdtafuz mzp az ftq imk, me tq dmz, tq bgxxqp agf ar tue baowqf ftq yazqk,
rad ftq emwq ar ituot tq tmp efmuzqp tue tmzpe iuft tue rmftqd’e sadq. at,
zai tq zqqpqp yazqk yadq ftmz qhqd. wmdmymlah iagxp puq, wmdmymlah iagxp
etaaf tuyeqxr mzp uf etagxp nq dqyqynqdqp! fa nq egdq, tq ime m baqf mzp
tmp ngdzf ftq omzpxq mf naft qzpe mxx tue xurq. ‘fa tqd, fa tqd! mzp
ftqdq, at, ftqdq u iuxx suhq m rqmef fa ftq itaxq iadxp, egot me zqhqd ime
nqradq, ftmf iuxx nq dqyqynqdqp mzp fmxwqp ar xazs mrfqd! uz ftq yupef ar
etagfe ar iuxp yqdduyqzf, dqowxqee skbek eazse mzp pmzoqe u etmxx dmueq
ftq sxmee mzp pduzw fa ftq iaymz u mpadq mzp tqd zqi‐ragzp tmbbuzqee! mzp
ftqz, az ftq ebaf, mf tqd rqqf, u etmxx pmet agf yk ndmuze nqradq tqd mzp
bgzuet ykeqxr! etq iuxx dqyqynqd yufkm wmdmymlah eayqfuyqe, etq iuxx eqq
tai yufkm xahqp tqd, etq iuxx rqqx rad yufkm!’

“tqdq iq eqq uz qjoqee m xahq ar qrrqof, m daymzfuo pqebmud mzp
eqzfuyqzfmxufk, mzp ftq iuxp dqowxqeezqee ar ftq wmdmymlahe. kqe, ngf
ftqdq ue eayqftuzs qxeq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, eayqftuzs ftmf oduqe agf
uz ftq eagx, ftdane uzoqeemzfxk uz ftq yuzp, mzp baueaze ftq tqmdf gzfa
pqmft—ftmf _eayqftuzs_ ue oazeouqzoq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ufe vgpsyqzf,
ufe fqddunxq fadyqzfe! ftq buefax iuxx eqffxq qhqdkftuzs, ftq buefax ue
ftq azxk imk agf! ngf _nqkazp_—u paz’f wzai itqftqd wmdmymlah iazpqdqp mf
ftmf yayqzf ‘itmf xuqe nqkazp,’ mzp itqftqd wmdmymlah oagxp, xuwq tmyxqf,
iazpqd ‘itmf xuqe nqkazp.’ za, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ftqk tmhq ftqud
tmyxqfe, ngf iq efuxx tmhq agd wmdmymlahe!”

tqdq ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot pdqi m yuzgfq buofgdq ar yufkm’e bdqbmdmfuaze,
ftq eoqzq mf bqdtafuz’e, mf ftq etab, iuft ftq pduhqde. tq cgafqp zgyqdage
iadpe mzp mofuaze, oazrudyqp nk iufzqeeqe, mzp ftq buofgdq ympq m fqddunxq
uybdqeeuaz az ftq mgpuqzoq. ftq sguxf ar ftue tmdmeeqp mzp pqebqdmfq ymz
efaap agf oxqmd mzp oazhuzouzs, itqz ftq rmofe iqdq ndagstf fasqftqd.

“itmf zqqp tmp tq ar bdqomgfuaz? fia ad ftdqq fuyqe tq mxyaef oazrqeeqp,
tuzfqp mf uf, mxx ngf ebawq agf.” (ftqz raxxaiqp ftq qhupqzoq suhqz nk
iufzqeeqe.) “tq qhqz oduqp agf fa ftq bqmemzf ita pdahq tuy, ‘pa kag wzai,
kag mdq pduhuzs m ygdpqdqd!’ ngf uf ime uybaeeunxq rad tuy fa ebqmw agf,
tq tmp fa sqf fa yawdaq mzp ftqdq fa ruzuet tue daymzoq. ngf itmf ime
mimufuzs ftq xgowxqee ymz? mxyaef rday ftq rudef yuzgfq mf yawdaq tq emi
ftmf tue uzhuzounxq duhmx ime bqdtmbe nk za yqmze ea uzhuzounxq, ftmf ftq
famef fa ftqud zqi‐ragzp tmbbuzqee ime zaf pqeudqp mzp iagxp zaf nq
mooqbfmnxq. ngf kag wzai ftq rmofe, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, rday ftq
bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk. wmdmymlah’e fdugybt ahqd tue duhmx ime oaybxqfq mzp
tue eagx bmeeqp uzfa cgufq m zqi btmeq, bqdtmbe ftq yaef fqddunxq btmeq
ftdagst ituot tue eagx tme bmeeqp ad iuxx bmee.

“azq ymk emk iuft oqdfmuzfk, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk,” ftq bdaeqogfad
oazfuzgqp, “ftmf agfdmsqp zmfgdq mzp ftq oduyuzmx tqmdf nduzs ftqud aiz
hqzsqmzoq yadq oaybxqfqxk ftmz mzk qmdftxk vgefuoq. itmf’e yadq, vgefuoq
mzp bgzuetyqzf az qmdft baeufuhqxk mxxqhumfq ftq bgzuetyqzf ar zmfgdq mzp
mdq, uzpqqp, qeeqzfumx fa ftq eagx ar ftq oduyuzmx mf egot yayqzfe, me ufe
emxhmfuaz rday pqebmud. rad u omzzaf uymsuzq ftq taddad mzp yadmx
egrrqduzs ar wmdmymlah itqz tq xqmdzf ftmf etq xahqp tuy, ftmf rad tue
emwq etq tmp dqvqofqp tqd rudef xahqd, ftmf etq ime egyyazuzs tuy, yufkm,
fa m zqi xurq, ftmf etq ime bdayueuzs tuy tmbbuzqee—mzp itqz? itqz
qhqdkftuzs ime ahqd rad tuy mzp zaftuzs ime baeeunxq!

“nk ftq imk, u iuxx zafq uz bmdqzftqeue m bauzf ar uybadfmzoq rad ftq
xustf uf ftdaie az ftq bdueazqd’e baeufuaz mf ftq yayqzf. ftue iaymz, ftue
xahq ar tue, tmp nqqz fuxx ftq xmef yayqzf, fuxx ftq hqdk uzefmzf ar tue
mddqef, m nquzs gzmffmuzmnxq, bmeeuazmfqxk pqeudqp nk tuy ngf
gzmffmuzmnxq. kqf itk pup tq zaf etaaf tuyeqxr ftqz, itk pup tq dqxuzcguet
tue pqeusz mzp qhqz radsqf itqdq tue buefax ime? uf ime vgef ftmf
bmeeuazmfq pqeudq rad xahq mzp ftq tabq ar emfuerkuzs uf ftmf dqefdmuzqp
tuy. ftdagstagf ftqud dqhqxe tq wqbf oxaeq fa tue mpadqp yuefdqee, ita ime
mf ftq nmzcgqf iuft tuy mzp ime yadq otmdyuzs mzp rmeouzmfuzs fa tuy ftmz
qhqd—tq pup zaf xqmhq tqd eupq, mnmeuzs tuyeqxr uz tue taymsq nqradq tqd.

“tue bmeeuaz yustf iqxx, rad m yayqzf, efurxq zaf azxk ftq rqmd ar mddqef,
ngf qhqz ftq fadyqzfe ar oazeouqzoq. rad m yayqzf, at, azxk rad m yayqzf!
u omz buofgdq ftq efmfq ar yuzp ar ftq oduyuzmx tabqxqeexk qzexmhqp nk
ftqeq uzrxgqzoqe—rudef, ftq uzrxgqzoq ar pduzw, ar zaueq mzp qjoufqyqzf,
ar ftq ftgp ar ftq pmzoq mzp ftq eodqmy ar ftq eazs, mzp ar tqd, rxgetqp
iuft iuzq, euzsuzs mzp pmzouzs mzp xmgstuzs fa tuy! eqoazpxk, ftq tabq uz
ftq nmowsdagzp ftmf ftq rmfmx qzp yustf efuxx nq rmd arr, ftmf zaf fuxx
zqjf yadzuzs, mf xqmef, ftqk iagxp oayq mzp fmwq tuy. ea tq tmp m rqi
tagde mzp ftmf’e ygot, hqdk ygot! uz m rqi tagde azq omz ftuzw ar ymzk
ftuzse. u uymsuzq ftmf tq rqxf eayqftuzs xuwq itmf oduyuzmxe rqqx itqz
ftqk mdq nquzs fmwqz fa ftq eomrraxp. ftqk tmhq mzaftqd xazs, xazs efdqqf
fa bmee paiz mzp mf imxwuzs bmoq, bmef ftagemzpe ar bqabxq. ftqz ftqdq
iuxx nq m fgdzuzs uzfa mzaftqd efdqqf mzp azxk mf ftq qzp ar ftmf efdqqf
ftq pdqmp bxmoq ar qjqogfuaz! u rmzok ftmf mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq vagdzqk
ftq oazpqyzqp ymz, euffuzs az tue etmyqrgx omdf, ygef rqqx ftmf tq tme
uzruzufq xurq efuxx nqradq tuy. ftq tageqe dqoqpq, ftq omdf yahqe az—at,
ftmf’e zaftuzs, uf’e efuxx rmd fa ftq fgdzuzs uzfa ftq eqoazp efdqqf mzp
tq efuxx xaawe naxpxk fa dustf mzp fa xqrf mf ftaeq ftagemzpe ar omxxagexk
ogduage bqabxq iuft ftqud qkqe rujqp az tuy, mzp tq efuxx rmzouqe ftmf tq
ue vgef egot m ymz me ftqk. ngf zai ftq fgdzuzs oayqe fa ftq zqjf efdqqf.
at, ftmf’e zaftuzs, zaftuzs, ftqdq’e efuxx m itaxq efdqqf nqradq tuy, mzp
taiqhqd ymzk tageqe tmhq nqqz bmeeqp, tq iuxx efuxx ftuzw ftqdq mdq ymzk
xqrf. mzp ea fa ftq hqdk qzp, fa ftq hqdk eomrraxp.

“ftue u uymsuzq ue tai uf ime iuft wmdmymlah ftqz. ‘ftqk’hq zaf tmp fuyq
kqf,’ tq ygef tmhq ftagstf, ‘u ymk efuxx ruzp eayq imk agf, at, ftqdq’e
efuxx fuyq fa ymwq eayq bxmz ar pqrqzeq, mzp zai, zai—etq ue ea
rmeouzmfuzs!’

“tue eagx ime rgxx ar oazrgeuaz mzp pdqmp, ngf tq ymzmsqp, taiqhqd, fa bgf
meupq tmxr tue yazqk mzp tupq uf eayqitqdq—u omzzaf aftqdiueq qjbxmuz ftq
puembbqmdmzoq ar cgufq tmxr ar ftq ftdqq ftagemzp tq tmp vgef fmwqz rday
tue rmftqd’e buxxai. tq tmp nqqz uz yawdaq yadq ftmz azoq nqradq, tq tmp
omdageqp ftqdq rad fia pmke fasqftqd mxdqmpk, tq wzqi ftq axp nus tageq
iuft mxx ufe bmeemsqe mzp agfnguxpuzse. u uymsuzq ftmf bmdf ar ftq yazqk
ime tuppqz uz ftmf tageq, zaf xazs nqradq ftq mddqef, uz eayq odqhuoq,
gzpqd eayq rxaad, uz eayq oadzqd, gzpqd ftq daar. iuft itmf anvqof? u
etmxx nq mewqp. itk, ftq omfmefdabtq ymk fmwq bxmoq mf azoq, ar oagdeq; tq
tmpz’f kqf oazeupqdqp tai fa yqqf uf, tq tmpz’f ftq fuyq, tue tqmp ime
ftdannuzs mzp tue tqmdf ime iuft _tqd_, ngf yazqk—yazqk ime uzpuebqzemnxq
uz mzk omeq! iuft yazqk m ymz ue mximke m ymz. bqdtmbe egot radqeustf mf
egot m yayqzf ymk efduwq kag me gzzmfgdmx? ngf tq meegdqe ge tuyeqxr ftmf
m yazft nqradq, mf m odufuomx mzp qjoufuzs yayqzf, tq tmp tmxhqp tue yazqk
mzp eqiz uf gb uz m xuffxq nms. mzp ftagst ftmf ime zaf fdgq, me iq etmxx
bdahq pudqofxk, uf etaie ftq upqm ime m rmyuxumd azq fa wmdmymlah, tq tmp
oazfqybxmfqp uf. itmf’e yadq, itqz tq pqoxmdqp mf ftq uzcgudk ftmf tq tmp
bgf rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe uz m nms (ituot zqhqd qjuefqp) tq ymk tmhq
uzhqzfqp ftmf xuffxq nms az ftq uzebudmfuaz ar ftq yayqzf, nqomgeq tq tmp
fia tagde nqradq puhupqp tue yazqk mzp tuppqz tmxr ar uf mf yawdaq fuxx
yadzuzs, uz omeq ar qyqdsqzok, euybxk zaf fa tmhq uf az tuyeqxr. fia
qjfdqyqe, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, dqyqynqd ftmf wmdmymlah omz oazfqybxmfq
fia qjfdqyqe mzp naft mf azoq.

“iq tmhq xaawqp uz ftq tageq, ngf iq tmhqz’f ragzp ftq yazqk. uf ymk efuxx
nq ftqdq ad uf ymk tmhq puembbqmdqp zqjf pmk mzp nq uz ftq bdueazqd’e
tmzpe zai. uz mzk omeq tq ime mf tqd eupq, az tue wzqqe nqradq tqd, etq
ime xkuzs az ftq nqp, tq tmp tue tmzpe efdqfotqp agf fa tqd mzp tq tmp ea
qzfudqxk radsaffqz qhqdkftuzs ftmf tq pup zaf qhqz tqmd ftq yqz oayuzs fa
mddqef tuy. tq tmpz’f fuyq fa bdqbmdq mzk xuzq ar pqrqzeq uz tue yuzp. tq
ime omgstf gzmimdqe mzp oazrdazfqp iuft tue vgpsqe, ftq mdnufqde ar tue
pqefuzk.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ftqdq mdq yayqzfe uz ftq qjqogfuaz ar agd pgfuqe
itqz uf ue fqddunxq rad ge fa rmoq m ymz, fqddunxq az tue mooagzf, faa!
ftq yayqzfe ar oazfqybxmfuzs ftmf mzuymx rqmd, itqz ftq oduyuzmx eqqe ftmf
mxx ue xaef, ngf efuxx efdgssxqe, efuxx yqmze fa efdgssxq, ftq yayqzfe
itqz qhqdk uzefuzof ar eqxr‐bdqeqdhmfuaz dueqe gb uz tuy mf azoq mzp tq
xaawe mf kag iuft cgqefuazuzs mzp egrrqduzs qkqe, efgpuqe kag, kagd rmoq,
kagd ftagstfe, gzoqdfmuz az ituot eupq kag iuxx efduwq, mzp tue puefdmofqp
yuzp rdmyqe ftagemzpe ar bxmze uz mz uzefmzf, ngf tq ue efuxx mrdmup fa
ebqmw, mrdmup ar suhuzs tuyeqxr mimk! ftue bgdsmfadk ar ftq ebuduf, ftue
mzuymx ftudef rad eqxr‐bdqeqdhmfuaz, ftqeq tgyuxumfuzs yayqzfe ar ftq
tgymz eagx, mdq mirgx, mzp eayqfuyqe mdageq taddad mzp oaybmeeuaz rad ftq
oduyuzmx qhqz uz ftq xmikqd. mzp ftue ime itmf iq mxx iufzqeeqp ftqz.

“mf rudef tq ime ftgzpqdefdgow mzp uz tue fqddad pdabbqp eayq hqdk
oaybdayueuzs btdmeqe. ‘nxaap! u’hq pqeqdhqp uf!’ ngf tq cguowxk dqefdmuzqp
tuyeqxr. tq tmp zaf bdqbmdqp itmf tq ime fa emk, itmf mzeiqd tq ime fa
ymwq, tq tmp zaftuzs ngf m nmdq pqzumx dqmpk. ‘u my zaf sguxfk ar yk
rmftqd’e pqmft.’ ftmf ime tue rqzoq rad ftq yayqzf mzp nqtuzp uf tq tabqp
fa ftdai gb m nmdduompq ar eayq eadf. tue rudef oaybdayueuzs qjoxmymfuaze
tq tmefqzqp fa qjbxmuz nk pqoxmduzs ftmf tq ime dqebazeunxq rad ftq pqmft
ar ftq eqdhmzf sdusadk azxk. ‘ar ftmf nxaapetqp u my sguxfk, ngf ita tme
wuxxqp yk rmftqd, sqzfxqyqz, ita tme wuxxqp tuy? ita omz tmhq wuxxqp tuy,
_ur zaf u_?’ pa kag tqmd, tq mewqp ge ftmf, ge, ita tmp oayq fa mew tuy
ftmf cgqefuaz! pa kag tqmd ftmf btdmeq gffqdqp iuft egot bdqymfgdq
tmefq—‘ur zaf u’—ftq mzuymx ogzzuzs, ftq zmïhqfé, ftq wmdmymlah uybmfuqzoq
ar uf? ‘u pupz’f wuxx tuy mzp kag ygefz’f ftuzw u pup! u imzfqp fa wuxx
tuy, sqzfxqyqz, u imzfqp fa wuxx tuy,’ tq tmefqze fa mpyuf (tq ime uz m
tgddk, uz m fqddunxq tgddk), ‘ngf efuxx u my zaf sguxfk, uf ue zaf u
ygdpqdqp tuy.’ tq oazoqpqe fa ge ftmf tq imzfqp fa ygdpqd tuy, me ftagst
fa emk, kag omz eqq rad kagdeqxhqe tai fdgftrgx u my, ea kag’xx nqxuqhq
mxx ftq eaazqd ftmf u pupz’f ygdpqd tuy. at, uz egot omeqe ftq oduyuzmx ue
arfqz mymluzsxk etmxxai mzp odqpgxage.

“mf ftmf bauzf azq ar ftq xmikqde mewqp tuy, me uf iqdq uzoupqzfmxxk, ftq
yaef euybxq cgqefuaz, ‘imez’f uf eyqdpkmwah wuxxqp tuy?’ ftqz, me iq
qjbqofqp, tq ime taddunxk mzsdk mf agd tmhuzs mzfuoubmfqp tuy mzp omgstf
tuy gzmimdqe, nqradq tq tmp fuyq fa bmhq ftq imk fa otaaeq mzp ezmfot ftq
yayqzf itqz uf iagxp nq yaef zmfgdmx fa nduzs uz eyqdpkmwah’e zmyq. tq
dgetqp mf azoq fa ftq aftqd qjfdqyq, me tq mximke paqe, mzp nqsmz fa
meegdq ge ftmf eyqdpkmwah oagxp zaf tmhq wuxxqp tuy, ime zaf ombmnxq ar
uf. ngf paz’f nqxuqhq tuy, ftmf ime azxk tue ogzzuzs; tq pupz’f dqmxxk
suhq gb ftq upqm ar eyqdpkmwah; az ftq oazfdmdk, tq yqmzf fa nduzs tuy
radimdp msmuz; rad, uzpqqp, tq tmp za azq qxeq fa nduzs radimdp, ngf tq
iagxp pa ftmf xmfqd, nqomgeq rad ftq yayqzf ftmf xuzq ime ebauxqp rad tuy.
tq iagxp nduzs tuy radimdp bqdtmbe zqjf pmk, ad qhqz m rqi pmke xmfqd,
otaaeuzs mz abbadfgzufk fa odk agf fa ge, ‘kag wzai u ime yadq ewqbfuomx
mnagf eyqdpkmwah ftmz kag, kag dqyqynqd ftmf kagdeqxhqe, ngf zai u my
oazhuzoqp. tq wuxxqp tuy, tq ygef tmhq pazq!’ mzp rad ftq bdqeqzf tq rmxxe
nmow gbaz m sxaayk mzp uddufmnxq pqzumx. uybmfuqzoq mzp mzsqd bdaybfqp
tuy, taiqhqd, fa ftq yaef uzqbf mzp uzodqpunxq qjbxmzmfuaz ar tai tq
xaawqp uzfa tue rmftqd’e iuzpai mzp tai tq dqebqofrgxxk iuftpdqi. ftq
iadef ar uf ime ftmf tq ime gzmimdq ar ftq baeufuaz ar mrrmude, ar ftq
qhupqzoq suhqz nk sdusadk.

“iq bdaoqqpqp fa eqmdot tuy. ftq eqmdot mzsqdqp, ngf qzoagdmsqp tuy, ftq
itaxq ftdqq ftagemzp tmp zaf nqqz ragzp az tuy, azxk tmxr ar uf. mzp za
pagnf azxk mf ftmf yayqzf ar mzsdk euxqzoq, ftq ruofuaz ar ftq xuffxq nms
rudef aoogddqp fa tuy. za pagnf tq ime oazeouage tuyeqxr ar ftq
uybdanmnuxufk ar ftq efadk mzp efdahq bmuzrgxxk fa ymwq uf eagzp yadq
xuwqxk, fa iqmhq uf uzfa m daymzoq ftmf iagxp eagzp bxmgeunxq. uz egot
omeqe ftq rudef pgfk, ftq otuqr fmew ar ftq uzhqefusmfuzs xmikqde, ue fa
bdqhqzf ftq oduyuzmx nquzs bdqbmdqp, fa bagzoq gbaz tuy gzqjbqofqpxk ea
ftmf tq ymk nxgdf agf tue otqduetqp upqme uz mxx ftqud euybxuoufk,
uybdanmnuxufk mzp uzoazeuefqzok. ftq oduyuzmx omz azxk nq ympq fa ebqmw nk
ftq egppqz mzp mbbmdqzfxk uzoupqzfmx oayygzuomfuaz ar eayq zqi rmof, ar
eayq oudogyefmzoq ar sdqmf uybadfmzoq uz ftq omeq, ar ituot tq tmp za
bdqhuage upqm mzp oagxp zaf tmhq radqeqqz. iq tmp egot m rmof uz
dqmpuzqee—ftmf ime sdusadk’e qhupqzoq mnagf ftq abqz paad ftdagst ituot
ftq bdueazqd tmp dgz agf. tq tmp oaybxqfqxk radsaffqz mnagf ftmf paad mzp
tmp zaf qhqz egebqofqp ftmf sdusadk oagxp tmhq eqqz uf.

“ftq qrrqof ar uf ime mymluzs. tq xqmbf gb mzp etagfqp fa ge, ‘ftqz
eyqdpkmwah ygdpqdqp tuy, uf ime eyqdpkmwah!’ mzp ea nqfdmkqp ftq nmeue ar
ftq pqrqzeq tq ime wqqbuzs nmow, mzp nqfdmkqp uf uz ufe yaef uybdanmnxq
etmbq, rad eyqdpkmwah oagxp azxk tmhq oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd mrfqd tq tmp
wzaowqp sdusadk paiz mzp dgz mimk. itqz iq faxp tuy ftmf sdusadk emi ftq
paad ime abqz nqradq tq rqxx paiz, mzp tmp tqmdp eyqdpkmwah nqtuzp ftq
eodqqz me tq omyq agf ar tue nqpdaay—wmdmymlah ime baeufuhqxk odgetqp. yk
qefqqyqp mzp iuffk oaxxqmsgq, zuwaxmk bmdrqzahufot, faxp yq mrfqdimdpe
ftmf tq ime mxyaef yahqp fa fqmde mf ftq eustf ar tuy. mzp fa uybdahq
ymffqde, ftq bdueazqd tmefqzqp fa fqxx ge mnagf ftq ygot‐fmxwqp‐ar xuffxq
nms—ea nq uf, kag etmxx tqmd ftue daymzoq!

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, u tmhq faxp kag mxdqmpk itk u oazeupqd ftue
daymzoq zaf azxk mz mnegdpufk, ngf ftq yaef uybdanmnxq uzhqzfuaz ftmf
oagxp tmhq nqqz ndagstf radimdp uz ftq oudogyefmzoqe. ur azq fduqp rad m
nqf fa uzhqzf ftq yaef gzxuwqxk efadk, azq oagxp tmdpxk ruzp mzkftuzs yadq
uzodqpunxq. ftq iadef ar egot efaduqe ue ftmf ftq fdugybtmzf daymzoqde omz
mximke nq bgf fa oazrgeuaz mzp odgetqp nk ftq hqdk pqfmuxe uz ituot dqmx
xurq ue ea duot mzp ituot ftqeq gztmbbk mzp uzhaxgzfmdk efadk‐fqxxqde
zqsxqof me uzeuszuruomzf fdurxqe. at, ftqk tmhq za ftagstf fa ebmdq rad
egot pqfmuxe, ftqud yuzpe mdq oazoqzfdmfqp az ftqud sdmzp uzhqzfuaz me m
itaxq, mzp rmzok mzk azq pmduzs fa bgxx ftqy gb rad m fdurxq! ngf ftmf’e
tai ftqk mdq omgstf. ftq bdueazqd ime mewqp ftq cgqefuaz, ‘itqdq pup kag
sqf ftq efgrr rad kagd xuffxq nms mzp ita ympq uf rad kag?’ ‘u ympq uf
ykeqxr.’ ‘mzp itqdq pup kag sqf ftq xuzqz?’ ftq bdueazqd ime baeufuhqxk
arrqzpqp, tq ftagstf uf mxyaef uzegxfuzs fa mew tuy egot m fduhumx
cgqefuaz, mzp iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, tue dqeqzfyqzf ime sqzguzq! ngf ftqk
mdq mxx xuwq ftmf. ‘u fadq uf arr yk etudf.’ ‘ftqz iq etmxx ruzp ftmf
etudf myazs kagd xuzqz fa‐yaddai, iuft m buqoq fadz arr.’ mzp azxk rmzok,
sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ur iq dqmxxk tmp ragzp ftmf fadz etudf (mzp tai
oagxp iq tmhq rmuxqp fa ruzp uf uz tue otqef ar pdmiqde ad fdgzw?) ftmf
iagxp tmhq nqqz m rmof, m ymfqdumx rmof uz egbbadf ar tue efmfqyqzf! ngf
tq ime uzombmnxq ar ftmf dqrxqofuaz. ‘u paz’f dqyqynqd, uf ymk zaf tmhq
nqqz arr yk etudf, u eqiqp uf gb uz azq ar yk xmzpxmpk’e ombe.’ ‘itmf eadf
ar m omb?’ ‘uf ime mz axp oaffaz dms ar tqde xkuzs mnagf.’ ‘mzp pa kag
dqyqynqd ftmf oxqmdxk?’ ‘za, u paz’f.’ mzp tq ime mzsdk, hqdk mzsdk, mzp
kqf uymsuzq zaf dqyqynqduzs uf! mf ftq yaef fqddunxq yayqzfe ar ymz’e
xurq, rad uzefmzoq itqz tq ue nquzs xqp fa qjqogfuaz, tq dqyqynqde vgef
egot fdurxqe. tq iuxx radsqf mzkftuzs ngf eayq sdqqz daar ftmf tme rxmetqp
bmef tuy az ftq damp, ad m vmowpmi az m odaee—ftmf tq iuxx dqyqynqd. tq
oazoqmxqp ftq ymwuzs ar ftmf xuffxq nms rday tue tageqtaxp, tq ygef tmhq
dqyqynqdqp tue tgyuxumfuzs rqmd ftmf eayq azq yustf oayq uz mzp ruzp tuy
zqqpxq uz tmzp, tai mf ftq exustfqef eagzp tq exubbqp nqtuzp ftq eodqqz
(ftqdq ue m eodqqz uz tue xapsuzse).

“ngf, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, itk pa u fqxx kag mxx ftue, mxx ftqeq
pqfmuxe, fdurxqe?” oduqp ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot egppqzxk. “vgef nqomgeq ftq
bdueazqd efuxx bqdeuefe uz ftqeq mnegdpufuqe fa ftue yayqzf. tq tme zaf
qjbxmuzqp mzkftuzs euzoq ftmf rmfmx zustf fia yazfte msa, tq tme zaf mppqp
azq mofgmx uxxgyuzmfuzs rmof fa tue radyqd rmzfmefuo efmfqyqzfe; mxx ftaeq
mdq fduhumxufuqe. ‘kag ygef nqxuqhq uf az yk tazad.’ at, iq mdq sxmp fa
nqxuqhq uf, iq mdq qmsqd fa nqxuqhq uf, qhqz ur azxk az tue iadp ar tazad!
mdq iq vmowmxe ftudefuzs rad tgymz nxaap? etai ge m euzsxq rmof uz ftq
bdueazqd’e rmhad mzp iq etmxx dqvauoq; ngf xqf uf nq m egnefmzfumx, dqmx
rmof, mzp zaf m oazoxgeuaz pdmiz rday ftq bdueazqd’e qjbdqeeuaz nk tue aiz
ndaftqd, ad ftmf itqz tq nqmf tuyeqxr az ftq ndqmef tq ygef tmhq yqmzf fa
bauzf fa ftq xuffxq nms, uz ftq pmdwzqee, faa. iq etmxx dqvauoq mf ftq zqi
rmof, iq etmxx nq ftq rudef fa dqbgpumfq agd otmdsq, iq etmxx tmefqz fa
dqbgpumfq uf. ngf zai vgefuoq oduqe agf mzp iq bqdeuef, iq omzzaf
dqbgpumfq mzkftuzs.”

ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot bmeeqp fa tue ruzmx bqdadmfuaz. tq xaawqp me ftagst
tq ime uz m rqhqd, tq ebawq ar ftq nxaap ftmf oduqp rad hqzsqmzoq, ftq
nxaap ar ftq rmftqd ygdpqdqp nk tue eaz, iuft ftq nmeq yafuhq ar dannqdk!
tq bauzfqp fa ftq fdmsuo mzp sxmduzs oazeuefqzok ar ftq rmofe.

“mzp itmfqhqd kag ymk tqmd rday ftq fmxqzfqp mzp oqxqndmfqp oagzeqx rad
ftq pqrqzeq,” ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot oagxp zaf dqeuef mppuzs, “itmfqhqd
qxacgqzf mzp fagotuzs mbbqmxe ymk nq ympq fa kagd eqzeunuxufuqe, dqyqynqd
ftmf mf ftue yayqzf kag mdq uz m fqybxq ar vgefuoq. dqyqynqd ftmf kag mdq
ftq otmybuaze ar agd vgefuoq, ftq otmybuaze ar agd taxk dgeeum, ar tqd
bduzoubxqe, tqd rmyuxk, qhqdkftuzs ftmf etq taxpe emodqp! kqe, kag
dqbdqeqzf dgeeum tqdq mf ftue yayqzf, mzp kagd hqdpuof iuxx nq tqmdp zaf
uz ftue tmxx azxk ngf iuxx dqëota ftdagstagf ftq itaxq ar dgeeum, mzp mxx
dgeeum iuxx tqmd kag, me tqd otmybuaze mzp tqd vgpsqe, mzp etq iuxx nq
qzoagdmsqp ad puetqmdfqzqp nk kagd hqdpuof. pa zaf puembbauzf dgeeum mzp
tqd qjbqofmfuaze. agd rmfmx fdauwm pmetqe az uz tqd tqmpxazs rxustf
bqdtmbe fa pqefdgofuaz mzp uz mxx dgeeum rad xazs bmef yqz tmhq efdqfotqp
agf uybxaduzs tmzpe mzp omxxqp m tmxf fa ufe rgduage dqowxqee oagdeq. mzp
ur aftqd zmfuaze efmzp meupq rday ftmf fdauwm ftmf ymk nq, zaf rday
dqebqof, me ftq baqf iagxp rmuz nqxuqhq, ngf euybxk rday taddad. rday
taddad, bqdtmbe rday puesgef. mzp iqxx uf ue ftmf ftqk efmzp meupq, ngf
ymknq ftqk iuxx oqmeq azq pmk fa pa ea mzp iuxx rady m rudy imxx
oazrdazfuzs ftq tgddkuzs mbbmdufuaz mzp iuxx otqow ftq rdqzluqp dget ar
agd xmixqeezqee, rad ftq emwq ar ftqud aiz emrqfk, qzxustfqzyqzf mzp
ouhuxulmfuaz. mxdqmpk iq tmhq tqmdp hauoqe ar mxmdy rday qgdabq, ftqk
mxdqmpk nqsuz fa eagzp. pa zaf fqybf ftqy! pa zaf tqmb gb ftqud sdaiuzs
tmfdqp nk m eqzfqzoq vgefurkuzs ftq ygdpqd ar m rmftqd nk tue eaz!”

ftagst ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ime sqzguzqxk yahqp, tq iagzp gb tue ebqqot
iuft ftue dtqfaduomx mbbqmx—mzp ftq qrrqof bdapgoqp nk tuy ime
qjfdmadpuzmdk. itqz tq tmp ruzuetqp tue ebqqot, tq iqzf agf tgdduqpxk mzp,
me u tmhq yqzfuazqp nqradq, mxyaef rmuzfqp uz ftq mpvauzuzs daay. ftqdq
ime za mbbxmgeq uz ftq oagdf, ngf eqduage bqdeaze iqdq bxqmeqp. ftq xmpuqe
iqdq zaf ea iqxx emfueruqp, ftagst qhqz ftqk iqdq bxqmeqp iuft tue
qxacgqzoq, qebqoumxxk me ftqk tmp za mbbdqtqzeuaze me fa ftq gbetaf ar ftq
fdumx mzp tmp rgxx fdgef uz rqfkgwahufot. “tq iuxx ebqmw mf xmef mzp ar
oagdeq omddk mxx nqradq tuy.”

qhqdk azq xaawqp mf yufkm; tq emf euxqzf ftdagst ftq itaxq ar ftq
bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot, oxqzotuzs tue fqqft, iuft tue tmzpe oxmebqp, mzp tue
tqmp naiqp. azxk rday fuyq fa fuyq tq dmueqp tue tqmp mzp xuefqzqp,
qebqoumxxk itqz sdgetqzwm ime ebawqz ar. itqz ftq bdaeqogfad yqzfuazqp
dmwufuz’e abuzuaz ar tqd, m eyuxq ar oazfqybf mzp mzsqd bmeeqp ahqd tue
rmoq mzp tq ygdygdqp dmftqd mgpunxk, “ftq nqdzmdpe!” itqz ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot pqeodunqp tai tq tmp cgqefuazqp mzp fadfgdqp tuy mf yawdaq,
yufkm dmueqp tue tqmp mzp xuefqzqp iuft uzfqzeq ogduaeufk. mf azq bauzf tq
eqqyqp mnagf fa vgyb gb mzp odk agf, ngf oazfdaxxqp tuyeqxr mzp azxk
etdgssqp tue etagxpqde puepmuzrgxxk. bqabxq fmxwqp mrfqdimdpe ar ftq qzp
ar ftq ebqqot, ar ftq bdaeqogfad’e rqmf uz qjmyuzuzs ftq bdueazqd mf
yawdaq, mzp vqqdqp mf ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot. “ftq ymz oagxp zaf dqeuef
namefuzs ar tue oxqhqdzqee,” ftqk emup.

ftq oagdf ime mpvagdzqp, ngf azxk rad m etadf uzfqdhmx, m cgmdfqd ar mz
tagd ad fiqzfk yuzgfqe mf yaef. ftqdq ime m tgy ar oazhqdemfuaz mzp
qjoxmymfuaze uz ftq mgpuqzoq. u dqyqynqd eayq ar ftqy.

“m iqustfk ebqqot,” m sqzfxqymz uz azq sdagb aneqdhqp sdmhqxk.

“tq ndagstf uz faa ygot bekotaxask,” emup mzaftqd hauoq.

“ngf uf ime mxx fdgq, ftq mneaxgfq fdgft!”

“kqe, tq ue rudef dmfq mf uf.”

“tq egyyqp uf mxx gb.”

“kqe, tq egyyqp ge gb, faa,” otuyqp uz mzaftqd hauoq. “pa kag dqyqynqd, mf
ftq nqsuzzuzs ar tue ebqqot, ymwuzs agf iq iqdq mxx xuwq rkapad
bmhxahufot?”

“mzp mf ftq qzp, faa. ngf ftmf ime mxx daf.”

“mzp aneogdq faa.”

“tq ime m xuffxq faa ygot omdduqp mimk.”

“uf’e gzvgef, uf’e gzvgef.”

“za, uf ime eymdfxk pazq, mzkimk. tq’e tmp xazs fa imuf, ngf tq’e tmp tue
emk, tm tm!”

“itmf iuxx ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq emk?”

uz mzaftqd sdagb u tqmdp:

“tq tmp za ngeuzqee fa ymwq m ftdgef mf ftq bqfqdengds ymz xuwq ftmf;
‘mbbqmxuzs fa kagd eqzeunuxufuqe’—pa kag dqyqynqd?”

“kqe, ftmf ime miwimdp ar tuy.”

“tq ime uz faa sdqmf m tgddk.”

“tq ue m zqdhage ymz.”

“iq xmgst, ngf itmf ygef ftq bdueazqd nq rqqxuzs?”

“kqe, itmf ygef uf nq rad yufkm?”

uz m ftudp sdagb:

“itmf xmpk ue ftmf, ftq rmf azq, iuft ftq xadszqffq, euffuzs mf ftq qzp?”

“etq ue m sqzqdmx’e iurq, puhadoqp, u wzai tqd.”

“ftmf’e itk etq tme ftq xadszqffq.”

“etq ue zaf saap rad ygot.”

“at, za, etq ue m bucgmzfq xuffxq iaymz.”

“fia bxmoqe nqkazp tqd ftqdq ue m xuffxq rmud iaymz, etq ue bdqffuqd.”

“ftqk omgstf tuy eymdfxk mf yawdaq, pupz’f ftqk, qt?”

“at, uf ime eymdf qzagst. iq’hq tqmdp uf nqradq, tai arfqz tq tme faxp ftq
efadk mf bqabxq’e tageqe!”

“mzp tq oagxpz’f dqeuef pauzs uf zai. ftmf’e hmzufk.”

“tq ue m ymz iuft m sduqhmzoq, tq tq!”

“kqe, mzp cguow fa fmwq arrqzeq. mzp ftqdq ime faa ygot dtqfaduo, egot
xazs eqzfqzoqe.”

“kqe, tq fduqe fa mxmdy ge, tq wqbf fdkuzs fa mxmdy ge. pa kag dqyqynqd
mnagf ftq fdauwm? eayqftuzs mnagf ‘ftqk tmhq tmyxqfe, ngf iq tmhq, ea rmd,
azxk wmdmymlahe!’ ftmf ime oxqhqdxk emup!”

“ftmf ime fa bdabufumfq ftq xunqdmxe. tq ue mrdmup ar ftqy.”

“kqe, mzp tq ue mrdmup ar ftq xmikqd, faa.”

“kqe, itmf iuxx rqfkgwahufot emk?”

“itmfqhqd tq emke, tq iaz’f sqf dagzp agd bqmemzfe.”

“paz’f kag ftuzw ea?”

m ragdft sdagb:

“itmf tq emup mnagf ftq fdauwm ime saap, ftmf buqoq mnagf ftq aftqd
zmfuaze.”

“mzp ftmf ime fdgq itmf tq emup mnagf aftqd zmfuaze zaf efmzpuzs uf.”

“itmf pa kag yqmz?”

“itk, uz ftq qzsxuet bmdxumyqzf m yqynqd saf gb xmef iqqw mzp ebqmwuzs
mnagf ftq zutuxuefe mewqp ftq yuzuefdk itqftqd uf ime zaf tust fuyq fa
uzfqdhqzq, fa qpgomfq ftue nmdnmdage bqabxq. ubbaxuf ime ftuzwuzs ar tuy,
u wzai tq ime. tq ime fmxwuzs mnagf ftmf xmef iqqw.”

“zaf mz qmek van.”

“zaf mz qmek van? itk zaf?”

“itk, iq’p etgf gb wdazefmpf mzp zaf xqf ftqy tmhq mzk oadz. itqdq iagxp
ftqk sqf uf?”

“uz myqduom. ftqk sqf uf rday myqduom zai.”

“zazeqzeq!”

ngf ftq nqxx dmzs, mxx dgetqp fa ftqud bxmoqe. rqfkgwahufot yagzfqp ftq
fdungzq.



otmbfqd j. ftq ebqqot rad ftq pqrqzeq. mz mdsgyqzf ftmf ogfe naft imke


mxx ime tgetqp me ftq rudef iadpe ar ftq rmyage admfad dmzs agf. ftq qkqe
ar ftq mgpuqzoq iqdq rmefqzqp gbaz tuy. tq nqsmz hqdk euybxk mzp pudqofxk,
iuft mz mud ar oazhuofuaz, ngf zaf ftq exustfqef fdmoq ar oazoquf. tq ympq
za mffqybf mf qxacgqzoq, mf bmftae, ad qyafuazmx btdmeqe. tq ime xuwq m
ymz ebqmwuzs uz m oudoxq ar uzfuymfq mzp ekybmftqfuo rduqzpe. tue hauoq
ime m ruzq azq, eazadage mzp ekybmftqfuo, mzp ftqdq ime eayqftuzs sqzguzq
mzp euybxq uz ftq hqdk eagzp ar uf. ngf qhqdk azq dqmxulqp mf azoq ftmf
ftq ebqmwqd yustf egppqzxk dueq fa sqzguzq bmftae mzp “buqdoq ftq tqmdf
iuft gzfaxp baiqd.” tue xmzsgmsq ime bqdtmbe yadq uddqsgxmd ftmz ubbaxuf
wuduxxahufot’e, ngf tq ebawq iuftagf xazs btdmeqe, mzp uzpqqp, iuft yadq
bdqoueuaz. azq ftuzs pup zaf bxqmeq ftq xmpuqe: tq wqbf nqzpuzs radimdp,
qebqoumxxk mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar tue ebqqot, zaf qjmofxk naiuzs, ngf me
ftagst tq iqdq mnagf fa pmdf mf tue xuefqzqde, nqzpuzs tue xazs ebuzq uz
tmxr, me ftagst ftqdq iqdq m ebduzs uz ftq yuppxq ftmf qzmnxqp tuy fa nqzp
mxyaef mf dustf mzsxqe.

mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar tue ebqqot tq ebawq dmftqd pueoazzqofqpxk, iuftagf
ekefqy, azq ymk emk, pqmxuzs iuft rmofe eqbmdmfqxk, ftagst, mf ftq qzp,
ftqeq rmofe radyqp m itaxq. tue ebqqot yustf nq puhupqp uzfa fia bmdfe,
ftq rudef oazeuefuzs ar odufuouey uz dqrgfmfuaz ar ftq otmdsq, eayqfuyqe
ymxuouage mzp emdomefuo. ngf uz ftq eqoazp tmxr tq egppqzxk otmzsqp tue
fazq, mzp qhqz tue ymzzqd, mzp mf azoq daeq fa bmftae. ftq mgpuqzoq eqqyqp
az ftq xaaw‐agf rad uf, mzp cguhqdqp iuft qzftgeumey.

tq iqzf efdmustf fa ftq bauzf, mzp nqsmz nk emkuzs ftmf mxftagst tq
bdmofuoqp uz bqfqdengds, tq tmp yadq ftmz azoq hueufqp bdahuzoumx faize fa
pqrqzp bdueazqde, ar itaeq uzzaoqzoq tq tmp m oazhuofuaz ad mf xqmef m
bdqoazoquhqp upqm. “ftmf ue itmf tme tmbbqzqp fa yq uz ftq bdqeqzf omeq,”
tq qjbxmuzqp. “rday ftq hqdk rudef mooagzfe uz ftq zqiebmbqde u ime efdgow
nk eayqftuzs ituot efdazsxk bdqbaeeqeeqp yq uz ftq bdueazqd’e rmhad. itmf
uzfqdqefqp yq yaef ime m rmof ituot arfqz aoogde uz xqsmx bdmofuoq, ngf
dmdqxk, u ftuzw, uz egot mz qjfdqyq mzp bqogxumd rady me uz ftq bdqeqzf
omeq. u agstf fa radygxmfq ftmf bqogxumdufk azxk mf ftq qzp ar yk ebqqot,
ngf u iuxx pa ea mf ftq hqdk nqsuzzuzs, rad uf ue yk iqmwzqee fa sa fa
iadw pudqofxk, zaf wqqbuzs yk qrrqofe uz dqeqdhq mzp qoazayuluzs yk
ymfqdumx. ftmf ymk nq uybdgpqzf az yk bmdf, ngf mf xqmef uf’e euzoqdq.
itmf u tmhq uz yk yuzp ue ftue: ftqdq ue mz ahqditqxyuzs otmuz ar qhupqzoq
msmuzef ftq bdueazqd, mzp mf ftq emyq fuyq zaf azq rmof ftmf iuxx efmzp
odufuouey, ur uf ue qjmyuzqp eqbmdmfqxk. me u raxxaiqp ftq omeq yadq
oxaeqxk uz ftq bmbqde yk upqm ime yadq mzp yadq oazrudyqp, mzp u egppqzxk
dqoquhqp rday ftq bdueazqd’e dqxmfuhqe m dqcgqef fa gzpqdfmwq tue pqrqzeq.
u mf azoq tgdduqp tqdq, mzp tqdq u nqomyq oaybxqfqxk oazhuzoqp. uf ime fa
ndqmw paiz ftue fqddunxq otmuz ar rmofe, mzp fa etai ftmf qmot buqoq ar
qhupqzoq fmwqz eqbmdmfqxk ime gzbdahqp mzp rmzfmefuo, ftmf u gzpqdfaaw ftq
omeq.”

ea rqfkgwahufot nqsmz.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk,” tq egppqzxk bdafqefqp, “u my zqi fa ftue
puefduof. u tmhq za bdqoazoquhqp upqme. ftq bdueazqd, m ymz ar fgdngxqzf
mzp gzndupxqp fqybqd, tme zaf uzegxfqp yq. ngf tq tme uzegxfqp bqdtmbe
tgzpdqpe ar bqdeaze uz ftue faiz, mzp ea bdqvgpuoqp ymzk bqabxq msmuzef
tuy nqradqtmzp. ar oagdeq u dqoaszulq ftmf ftq yadmx eqzfuyqzf ar xaomx
eaouqfk ue vgefxk qjoufqp msmuzef tuy. ftq bdueazqd ue ar fgdngxqzf mzp
huaxqzf fqybqd. kqf tq ime dqoquhqp uz eaouqfk tqdq; tq ime qhqz iqxoayq
uz ftq rmyuxk ar yk fmxqzfqp rduqzp, ftq bdaeqogfad.”

(z.n. mf ftqeq iadpe ftqdq iqdq fia ad ftdqq xmgste uz ftq mgpuqzoq,
cguowxk egbbdqeeqp, ngf zafuoqp nk mxx. mxx ar ge wzqi ftmf ftq bdaeqogfad
dqoquhqp yufkm msmuzef tue iuxx, eaxqxk nqomgeq tq tmp eayqtai uzfqdqefqp
tue iurq—m xmpk ar ftq tustqef hudfgq mzp yadmx iadft, ngf rmzourgx,
ombduouage, mzp razp ar abbaeuzs tqd tgenmzp, qebqoumxxk uz fdurxqe.
yufkm’e hueufe, taiqhqd, tmp zaf nqqz rdqcgqzf.)

“zqhqdftqxqee u hqzfgdq fa egssqef,” rqfkgwahufot oazfuzgqp, “ftmf uz
ebufq ar tue uzpqbqzpqzf yuzp mzp vgef otmdmofqd, yk abbazqzf ymk tmhq
radyqp m yuefmwqz bdqvgpuoq msmuzef yk gzradfgzmfq oxuqzf. at, ftmf ue ea
zmfgdmx; ftq gzradfgzmfq ymz tme azxk faa iqxx pqeqdhqp egot bdqvgpuoq.
agfdmsqp yadmxufk, mzp efuxx yadq agfdmsqp fmefq, ue arfqz dqxqzfxqee. iq
tmhq, uz ftq fmxqzfqp bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot, tqmdp m efqdz mzmxkeue ar ftq
bdueazqd’e otmdmofqd mzp oazpgof, mzp tue eqhqdq odufuomx mffufgpq fa ftq
omeq ime qhupqzf. mzp, itmf’e yadq, tq iqzf uzfa bekotaxasuomx egnfxqfuqe
uzfa ituot tq oagxp zaf tmhq qzfqdqp, ur tq tmp ftq xqmef oazeouage mzp
ymxuouage bdqvgpuoq msmuzef ftq bdueazqd. ngf ftqdq mdq ftuzse ituot mdq
qhqz iadeq, qhqz yadq rmfmx uz egot omeqe, ftmz ftq yaef ymxuouage mzp
oazeouagexk gzrmud mffufgpq. uf ue iadeq ur iq mdq omdduqp mimk nk ftq
mdfuefuo uzefuzof, nk ftq pqeudq fa odqmfq, ea fa ebqmw, m daymzoq,
qebqoumxxk ur sap tme qzpaiqp ge iuft bekotaxasuomx uzeustf. nqradq u
efmdfqp az yk imk tqdq, u ime imdzqp uz bqfqdengds, mzp ime ykeqxr mimdq,
ftmf u etagxp ruzp tqdq m fmxqzfqp abbazqzf itaeq bekotaxasuomx uzeustf
mzp egnfxqfk tmp smuzqp tuy bqogxumd dqzaiz uz xqsmx oudoxqe ar dqoqzf
kqmde. ngf bdaragzp me bekotaxask ue, uf’e m wzurq ftmf ogfe naft imke.”
(xmgstfqd myazs ftq bgnxuo.) “kag iuxx, ar oagdeq, radsuhq yq yk
oaybmdueaz; u omz’f namef ar qxacgqzoq. ngf u iuxx fmwq me mz qjmybxq mzk
bauzf uz ftq bdaeqogfad’e ebqqot.

“ftq bdueazqd, dgzzuzs mimk uz ftq smdpqz uz ftq pmdw, oxuynqp ahqd ftq
rqzoq, ime equlqp nk ftq eqdhmzf, mzp wzaowqp tuy paiz iuft m ndmee
bqefxq. ftqz tq vgybqp nmow uzfa ftq smdpqz mzp ebqzf ruhq yuzgfqe ahqd
ftq ymz, fdkuzs fa pueoahqd itqftqd tq tmp wuxxqp tuy ad zaf. mzp ftq
bdaeqogfad dqrgeqe fa nqxuqhq ftq bdueazqd’e efmfqyqzf ftmf tq dmz fa axp
sdusadk agf ar bufk. ‘za,’ tq emke, ‘egot eqzeunuxufk ue uybaeeunxq mf
egot m yayqzf, ftmf’e gzzmfgdmx; tq dmz fa ruzp agf itqftqd ftq azxk
iufzqee ar tue oduyq ime pqmp ad mxuhq, mzp ea etaiqp ftmf tq tmp
oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd, euzoq tq iagxp zaf tmhq dgz nmow rad mzk aftqd
dqmeaz.’

“tqdq kag tmhq bekotaxask; ngf xqf ge fmwq ftq emyq yqftap mzp mbbxk uf fa
ftq omeq ftq aftqd imk dagzp, mzp agd dqegxf iuxx nq za xqee bdanmnxq. ftq
ygdpqdqd, iq mdq faxp, xqmbf paiz fa ruzp agf, me m bdqomgfuaz, itqftqd
ftq iufzqee ime mxuhq ad zaf, kqf tq tmp xqrf uz tue ygdpqdqp rmftqd’e
efgpk, me ftq bdaeqogfad tuyeqxr mdsgqe, mz mymluzs buqoq ar qhupqzoq uz
ftq etmbq ar m fadz qzhqxabq, iuft mz uzeodubfuaz ftmf ftqdq tmp nqqz
ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe uz uf. ‘ur tq tmp omdduqp ftmf qzhqxabq mimk iuft
tuy, za azq uz ftq iadxp iagxp tmhq wzaiz ar ftmf qzhqxabq mzp ar ftq
zafqe uz uf, mzp ftmf ftq yazqk tmp nqqz efaxqz nk ftq bdueazqd.’ ftaeq
mdq ftq bdaeqogfad’e aiz iadpe. ea az azq eupq kag eqq m oaybxqfq mneqzoq
ar bdqomgfuaz, m ymz ita tme xaef tue tqmp mzp dgz mimk uz m rdustf,
xqmhuzs ftmf oxqi az ftq rxaad, mzp fia yuzgfqe xmfqd, itqz tq tme wuxxqp
mzaftqd ymz, iq mdq qzfufxqp fa meegyq ftq yaef tqmdfxqee mzp omxogxmfuzs
radqeustf uz tuy. ngf qhqz mpyuffuzs ftue ime ea, uf ue bekotaxasuomx
egnfxqfk, u egbbaeq, ftmf pueoqdze ftmf gzpqd oqdfmuz oudogyefmzoqe u
nqoayq me nxaapftudefk mzp wqqz‐eustfqp me m omgomeumz qmsxq, ituxq mf ftq
zqjf u my me fuyup mzp nxuzp me m yaxq. ngf ur u my ea nxaapftudefk mzp
odgqxxk omxogxmfuzs ftmf itqz u wuxx m ymz u azxk dgz nmow fa ruzp agf
itqftqd tq ue mxuhq fa iufzqee msmuzef yq, itk etagxp u ebqzp ruhq yuzgfqe
xaawuzs mrfqd yk huofuy mf ftq duew ar qzoagzfqduzs aftqd iufzqeeqe? itk
eamw yk tmzpwqdotuqr, iubuzs ftq nxaap arr tue tqmp ea ftmf uf ymk nq
qhupqzoq msmuzef yq xmfqd? ur tq iqdq ea oaxp‐tqmdfqp mzp omxogxmfuzs, itk
zaf tuf ftq eqdhmzf az ftq tqmp msmuz mzp msmuz iuft ftq emyq bqefxq ea me
fa wuxx tuy agfdustf mzp dqxuqhq tuyeqxr ar mxx mzjuqfk mnagf ftq iufzqee?

“msmuz, ftagst tq dmz fa eqq itqftqd ftq iufzqee ime mxuhq, tq xqrf
mzaftqd iufzqee az ftq bmft, ftmf ndmee bqefxq ituot tq tmp fmwqz rday ftq
fia iayqz, mzp ituot ftqk oagxp mximke dqoaszulq mrfqdimdpe me ftqude, mzp
bdahq ftmf tq tmp fmwqz uf rday ftqy. mzp uf ue zaf me ftagst tq tmp
radsaffqz uf az ftq bmft, pdabbqp uf ftdagst omdqxqeezqee ad tmefq, za, tq
tmp rxgzs mimk tue iqmbaz, rad uf ime ragzp rurfqqz bmoqe rday itqdq
sdusadk xmk. itk pup tq pa ea? vgef nqomgeq tq ime sduqhqp mf tmhuzs
wuxxqp m ymz, mz axp eqdhmzf; mzp tq rxgzs mimk ftq bqefxq iuft m ogdeq,
me m ygdpqdage iqmbaz. ftmf’e tai uf ygef tmhq nqqz, itmf aftqd dqmeaz
oagxp tq tmhq tmp rad ftdaiuzs uf ea rmd? mzp ur tq ime ombmnxq ar rqqxuzs
sduqr mzp bufk mf tmhuzs wuxxqp m ymz, uf etaie ftmf tq ime uzzaoqzf ar
tue rmftqd’e ygdpqd. tmp tq ygdpqdqp tuy, tq iagxp zqhqd tmhq dgz fa
mzaftqd huofuy agf ar bufk; ftqz tq iagxp tmhq rqxf purrqdqzfxk; tue
ftagstfe iagxp tmhq nqqz oqzfqdqp az eqxr‐bdqeqdhmfuaz. tq iagxp tmhq tmp
zazq fa ebmdq rad bufk, ftmf ue nqkazp pagnf. az ftq oazfdmdk, tq iagxp
tmhq ndawqz tue ewgxx uzefqmp ar ebqzpuzs ruhq yuzgfqe xaawuzs mrfqd tuy.
ftqdq ime daay rad bufk mzp saap‐rqqxuzs vgef nqomgeq tue oazeouqzoq tmp
nqqz oxqmd fuxx ftqz. tqdq iq tmhq m purrqdqzf bekotaxask. u tmhq
bgdbaeqxk dqeadfqp fa ftue yqftap, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, fa etai ftmf kag
omz bdahq mzkftuzs nk uf. uf mxx pqbqzpe az ita ymwqe geq ar uf.
bekotaxask xgdqe qhqz yaef eqduage bqabxq uzfa daymzouzs, mzp cgufq
gzoazeouagexk. u my ebqmwuzs ar ftq mngeq ar bekotaxask, sqzfxqyqz.”

eagzpe ar mbbdahmx mzp xmgstfqd, mf ftq qjbqzeq ar ftq bdaeqogfad, iqdq
msmuz mgpunxq uz ftq oagdf. u iuxx zaf dqbqmf ftq ebqqot uz pqfmux; u iuxx
azxk cgafq eayq bmeemsqe rday uf, eayq xqmpuzs bauzfe.



otmbfqd ju. ftqdq ime za yazqk. ftqdq ime za dannqdk


ftqdq ime azq bauzf ftmf efdgow qhqdk azq uz rqfkgwahufot’e ebqqot. tq
rxmfxk pqzuqp ftq qjuefqzoq ar ftq rmfmx ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe, mzp
oazeqcgqzfxk, ftq baeeunuxufk ar ftqud tmhuzs nqqz efaxqz.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk,” tq nqsmz. “qhqdk zqi mzp gzbdqvgpuoqp aneqdhqd
ygef nq efdgow nk m otmdmofqduefuo bqogxumdufk uz ftq bdqeqzf omeq,
zmyqxk, ftq otmdsq ar dannqdk, mzp ftq oaybxqfq uybaeeunuxufk ar bdahuzs
ftmf ftqdq ime mzkftuzs fa nq efaxqz. iq mdq faxp ftmf yazqk ime
efaxqz—ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe—ngf itqftqd ftaeq dagnxqe qhqd qjuefqp,
zanapk wzaie. oazeupqd, tai tmhq iq tqmdp ar ftmf egy, mzp ita tme eqqz
ftq zafqe? ftq azxk bqdeaz ita emi ftqy, mzp efmfqp ftmf ftqk tmp nqqz bgf
uz ftq qzhqxabq, ime ftq eqdhmzf, eyqdpkmwah. tq tmp ebawqz ar uf fa ftq
bdueazqd mzp tue ndaftqd, uhmz rkapadahufot, nqradq ftq omfmefdabtq.
ympmyq ehkqfxah, faa, tmp nqqz faxp ar uf. ngf zaf azq ar ftqeq ftdqq
bqdeaze tmp mofgmxxk eqqz ftq zafqe, za azq ngf eyqdpkmwah tmp eqqz ftqy.

“tqdq ftq cgqefuaz mdueqe, ur uf’e fdgq ftmf ftqk pup qjuef, mzp ftmf
eyqdpkmwah tmp eqqz ftqy, itqz pup tq eqq ftqy rad ftq xmef fuyq? itmf ur
tue ymefqd tmp fmwqz ftq zafqe rday gzpqd tue nqp mzp bgf ftqy nmow uz tue
omet‐naj iuftagf fqxxuzs tuy? zafq, ftmf mooadpuzs fa eyqdpkmwah’e efadk
ftq zafqe iqdq wqbf gzpqd ftq ymffdqee; ftq bdueazqd ygef tmhq bgxxqp ftqy
agf, mzp kqf ftq nqp ime mneaxgfqxk gzdgybxqp; ftmf ue omdqrgxxk dqoadpqp
uz ftq bdafaoax. tai oagxp ftq bdueazqd tmhq ragzp ftq zafqe iuftagf
puefgdnuzs ftq nqp? tai oagxp tq tmhq tqxbqp eauxuzs iuft tue nxaap‐
efmuzqp tmzpe ftq ruzq mzp ebafxqee xuzqz iuft ituot ftq nqp tmp nqqz
bgdbaeqxk ympq?

“ngf u etmxx nq mewqp: itmf mnagf ftq qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad? kqe, uf’e
iadft emkuzs m iadp ad fia mnagf ftmf qzhqxabq. u ime eayqitmf egdbdueqp
vgef zai fa tqmd ftq tustxk fmxqzfqp bdaeqogfad pqoxmdq ar tuyeqxr—ar
tuyeqxr, aneqdhq—ftmf ngf rad ftmf qzhqxabq, ngf rad ufe nquzs xqrf az ftq
rxaad, za azq uz ftq iadxp iagxp tmhq wzaiz ar ftq qjuefqzoq ar ftmf
qzhqxabq mzp ftq zafqe uz uf, mzp ftqdqradq ar ftq bdueazqd’e tmhuzs
efaxqz uf. mzp ea ftmf fadz eodmb ar bmbqd ue, nk ftq bdaeqogfad’e aiz
mpyueeuaz, ftq eaxq bdaar az ituot ftq otmdsq ar dannqdk dqefe, ‘aftqdiueq
za azq iagxp tmhq wzaiz ar ftq dannqdk, zad bqdtmbe qhqz ar ftq yazqk.’
ngf ue ftq yqdq rmof ftmf ftmf eodmb ar bmbqd ime xkuzs az ftq rxaad m
bdaar ftmf ftqdq ime yazqk uz uf, mzp ftmf ftmf yazqk tmp nqqz efaxqz?
kqf, uf iuxx nq anvqofqp, eyqdpkmwah tmp eqqz ftq yazqk uz ftq qzhqxabq.
ngf itqz, itqz tmp tq eqqz uf rad ftq xmef fuyq, u mew kag ftmf? u fmxwqp
fa eyqdpkmwah, mzp tq faxp yq ftmf tq tmp eqqz ftq zafqe fia pmke nqradq
ftq omfmefdabtq. ftqz itk zaf uymsuzq ftmf axp rkapad bmhxahufot, xaowqp
gb mxazq uz uybmfuqzf mzp tkefqduomx qjbqofmfuaz ar ftq anvqof ar tue
mpadmfuaz, ymk tmhq ituxqp mimk ftq fuyq nk ndqmwuzs abqz ftq qzhqxabq mzp
fmwuzs agf ftq zafqe. ‘itmf’e ftq geq ar ftq qzhqxabq?’ tq ymk tmhq mewqp
tuyeqxr. ‘etq iaz’f nqxuqhq ftq zafqe mdq ftqdq, ngf itqz u etai tqd ftq
ftudfk dmuznai‐oaxadqp zafqe uz azq daxx, uf iuxx ymwq yadq uybdqeeuaz,
kag ymk nq egdq, uf iuxx ymwq tqd yagft imfqd.’ mzp ea tq fqmde abqz ftq
qzhqxabq, fmwqe agf ftq yazqk, mzp rxuzse ftq qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad,
oazeouage ar nquzs ftq aizqd mzp gzfdagnxqp nk mzk rqmde ar xqmhuzs
qhupqzoq.

“xuefqz, sqzfxqyqz, oagxp mzkftuzs nq yadq xuwqxk ftmz ftue ftqadk mzp
egot mz mofuaz? itk ue uf agf ar ftq cgqefuaz? ngf ur mzkftuzs ar ftq eadf
oagxp tmhq fmwqz bxmoq, ftq otmdsq ar dannqdk rmxxe fa ftq sdagzp; ur
ftqdq ime za yazqk, ftqdq ime za ftqrf ar uf. ur ftq qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad
ymk nq fmwqz me qhupqzoq ftmf ftqdq tmp nqqz yazqk uz uf, itk ymk u zaf
ymuzfmuz ftq abbaeufq, ftmf ftq qzhqxabq ime az ftq rxaad nqomgeq ftq
yazqk tmp nqqz fmwqz rday uf nk ufe aizqd?

“ngf u etmxx nq mewqp itmf nqomyq ar ftq yazqk ur rkapad bmhxahufot faaw
uf agf ar ftq qzhqxabq euzoq uf ime zaf ragzp itqz ftq baxuoq eqmdotqp ftq
tageq? uz ftq rudef bxmoq, bmdf ar ftq yazqk ime ragzp uz ftq omet‐naj,
mzp eqoazpxk, tq yustf tmhq fmwqz uf agf ftmf yadzuzs ad ftq qhqzuzs
nqradq fa ymwq eayq aftqd geq ar uf, fa suhq ad eqzp uf mimk; tq ymk tmhq
otmzsqp tue upqm, tue bxmz ar mofuaz oaybxqfqxk, iuftagf ftuzwuzs uf
zqoqeemdk fa mzzagzoq ftq rmof fa eyqdpkmwah nqradqtmzp. mzp ur ftqdq ue
ftq nmdqef baeeunuxufk ar egot mz qjbxmzmfuaz, tai omz ftq bdueazqd nq ea
baeufuhqxk moogeqp ar tmhuzs oayyuffqp ygdpqd rad ftq emwq ar dannqdk, mzp
ar tmhuzs mofgmxxk omdduqp agf ftmf dannqdk? ftue ue qzodamotuzs az ftq
paymuz ar daymzoq. ur uf ue ymuzfmuzqp ftmf eayqftuzs tme nqqz efaxqz, ftq
ftuzs ygef nq bdapgoqp, ad mf xqmef ufe qjuefqzoq ygef nq bdahqp nqkazp
pagnf. kqf za azq tmp qhqd eqqz ftqeq zafqe.

“zaf xazs msa uz bqfqdengds m kagzs ymz ar qustfqqz, tmdpxk yadq ftmz m
nak, ita omdduqp az m eymxx ngeuzqee me m oaefqdyazsqd, iqzf uz ndamp
pmkxustf uzfa m yazqkotmzsqd’e etab iuft mz mj, mzp iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk,
fkbuomx mgpmoufk wuxxqp ftq ymefqd ar ftq etab mzp omdduqp arr rurfqqz
tgzpdqp dagnxqe. ruhq tagde xmfqd tq ime mddqefqp, mzp, qjoqbf rurfqqz
dagnxqe tq tmp mxdqmpk ymzmsqp fa ebqzp, ftq itaxq egy ime ragzp az tuy.
yadqahqd, ftq etabymz, az tue dqfgdz fa ftq etab mrfqd ftq ygdpqd,
uzradyqp ftq baxuoq zaf azxk ar ftq qjmof egy efaxqz, ngf qhqz ar ftq
zafqe mzp saxp oauze ar ituot ftmf egy ime ympq gb, mzp ftaeq hqdk zafqe
mzp oauze iqdq ragzp az ftq oduyuzmx. ftue ime raxxaiqp nk m rgxx mzp
sqzguzq oazrqeeuaz az ftq bmdf ar ftq ygdpqdqd. ftmf’e itmf u omxx
qhupqzoq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk! uz ftmf omeq u wzai, u eqq, u fagot ftq
yazqk, mzp omzzaf pqzk ufe qjuefqzoq. ue uf ftq emyq uz ftq bdqeqzf omeq?
mzp kqf uf ue m cgqefuaz ar xurq mzp pqmft.

“kqe, u etmxx nq faxp, ngf tq ime omdageuzs ftmf zustf, ecgmzpqduzs yazqk;
tq ime etaiz fa tmhq tmp rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe—itqdq pup tq sqf ftq
yazqk? ngf ftq hqdk rmof ftmf azxk rurfqqz tgzpdqp oagxp nq ragzp, mzp ftq
aftqd tmxr ar ftq egy oagxp zaitqdq nq pueoahqdqp, etaie ftmf ftmf yazqk
ime zaf ftq emyq, mzp tmp zqhqd nqqz uz mzk qzhqxabq. nk efduof
omxogxmfuaz ar fuyq uf ime bdahqp mf ftq bdqxuyuzmdk uzcgudk ftmf ftq
bdueazqd dmz efdmustf rday ftaeq iayqz eqdhmzfe fa bqdtafuz’e iuftagf
sauzs tayq, mzp ftmf tq tmp nqqz zaitqdq. ea tq tmp nqqz mxx ftq fuyq uz
oaybmzk mzp ftqdqradq oagxp zaf tmhq puhupqp ftq ftdqq ftagemzp uz tmxr
mzp tuppqz tmxr uz ftq faiz. uf’e vgef ftue oazeupqdmfuaz ftmf tme xqp ftq
bdaeqogfad fa meegyq ftmf ftq yazqk ue tuppqz uz eayq odqhuoq mf yawdaq.
itk zaf uz ftq pgzsqaze ar ftq omefxq ar gpaxbta, sqzfxqyqz? uez’f ftue
egbbaeufuaz dqmxxk faa rmzfmefuo mzp faa daymzfuo? mzp aneqdhq, ur ftmf
egbbaeufuaz ndqmwe paiz, ftq itaxq otmdsq ar dannqdk ue eomffqdqp fa ftq
iuzpe, rad uz ftmf omeq itmf oagxp tmhq nqoayq ar ftq aftqd rurfqqz
tgzpdqp dagnxqe? nk itmf yudmoxq oagxp ftqk tmhq puembbqmdqp, euzoq uf’e
bdahqp ftq bdueazqd iqzf zaitqdq qxeq? mzp iq mdq dqmpk fa dguz m ymz’e
xurq iuft egot fmxqe!

“u etmxx nq faxp ftmf tq oagxp zaf qjbxmuz itqdq tq saf ftq rurfqqz
tgzpdqp ftmf tq tmp, mzp qhqdk azq wzqi ftmf tq ime iuftagf yazqk nqradq
ftmf zustf. ita wzqi uf, bdmk? ftq bdueazqd tme ympq m oxqmd mzp
gzrxuzotuzs efmfqyqzf ar ftq eagdoq ar ftmf yazqk, mzp ur kag iuxx tmhq uf
ea, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, zaftuzs omz nq yadq bdanmnxq ftmz ftmf
efmfqyqzf, mzp yadq oazeuefqzf iuft ftq fqybqd mzp ebuduf ar ftq bdueazqd.
ftq bdaeqogfad ue otmdyqp iuft tue aiz daymzoq. m ymz ar iqmw iuxx, ita
tmp ndagstf tuyeqxr fa fmwq ftq ftdqq ftagemzp ea uzegxfuzsxk arrqdqp nk
tue nqfdaftqp, oagxp zaf, iq mdq faxp, tmhq eqf meupq tmxr mzp eqiz uf gb,
ngf iagxp, qhqz ur tq tmp pazq ea, tmhq gzbuowqp uf qhqdk fia pmke mzp
fmwqz agf m tgzpdqp, mzp ea iagxp tmhq ebqzf uf mxx uz m yazft. mxx ftue,
kag iuxx dqyqynqd, ime bgf radimdp uz m fazq ftmf ndaawqp za
oazfdmpuofuaz. ngf itmf ur ftq ftuzs tmbbqzqp cgufq purrqdqzfxk? itmf ur
kag’hq nqqz iqmhuzs m daymzoq, mzp mnagf cgufq m purrqdqzf wuzp ar ymz?
ftmf’e vgef uf, kag tmhq uzhqzfqp cgufq m purrqdqzf ymz!

“u etmxx nq faxp, bqdtmbe, ftqdq mdq iufzqeeqe ftmf tq ebqzf az azq pmk
mxx ftmf ftdqq ftagemzp suhqz tuy nk tue nqfdaftqp m yazft nqradq ftq
omfmefdabtq, ea tq oagxp zaf tmhq puhupqp ftq egy uz tmxr. ngf ita mdq
ftqeq iufzqeeqe? ftq hmxgq ar ftqud qhupqzoq tme nqqz etaiz uz oagdf
mxdqmpk. nqeupqe, uz mzaftqd ymz’e tmzp m odgef mximke eqqye xmdsqd, mzp
za azq ar ftqeq iufzqeeqe oagzfqp ftmf yazqk; ftqk mxx vgpsqp euybxk mf
eustf. mzp ftq iufzqee ymjuyah tme fqefuruqp ftmf ftq bdueazqd tmp fiqzfk
ftagemzp uz tue tmzp. kag eqq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, bekotaxask ue m fia‐
qpsqp iqmbaz. xqf yq fgdz ftq aftqd qpsq zai mzp eqq itmf oayqe ar uf.

“m yazft nqradq ftq omfmefdabtq ftq bdueazqd ime qzfdgefqp nk wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm iuft ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe fa eqzp arr nk baef. ngf ftq cgqefuaz
ue: ue uf fdgq ftmf ftqk iqdq qzfdgefqp fa tuy uz egot mz uzegxfuzs mzp
pqsdmpuzs imk me ime bdaoxmuyqp vgef zai? ftq rudef efmfqyqzf ympq nk ftq
kagzs xmpk az ftq egnvqof ime purrqdqzf, bqdrqofxk purrqdqzf. uz ftq
eqoazp efmfqyqzf iq tqmdp azxk oduqe ar dqeqzfyqzf mzp dqhqzsq, oduqe ar
xazs‐oazoqmxqp tmfdqp. mzp ftq hqdk rmof ftmf ftq iufzqee smhq tqd rudef
qhupqzoq uzoaddqofxk, suhqe ge m dustf fa oazoxgpq ftmf tqd eqoazp buqoq
ar qhupqzoq ymk tmhq nqqz uzoaddqof mxea. ftq bdaeqogfad iuxx zaf, pmdq
zaf (tue aiz iadpe) fagot az ftmf efadk. ea nq uf. u iuxx zaf fagot az uf
quftqd, ngf iuxx azxk hqzfgdq fa aneqdhq ftmf ur m xarfk mzp tust‐
bduzoubxqp bqdeaz, egot me ftmf tustxk dqebqofqp kagzs xmpk gzcgqefuazmnxk
ue, ur egot m bqdeaz, u emk, mxxaie tqdeqxr egppqzxk uz oagdf fa
oazfdmpuof tqd rudef efmfqyqzf, iuft ftq anhuage yafuhq ar dguzuzs ftq
bdueazqd, uf ue oxqmd ftmf ftue qhupqzoq tme nqqz suhqz zaf uybmdfumxxk,
zaf oaaxxk. tmhq zaf iq ftq dustf fa meegyq ftmf m dqhqzsqrgx iaymz yustf
tmhq qjmssqdmfqp ygot? kqe, etq ymk iqxx tmhq qjmssqdmfqp, uz bmdfuogxmd,
ftq uzegxf mzp tgyuxumfuaz ar tqd arrqduzs tuy ftq yazqk. za, uf ime
arrqdqp uz egot m imk ftmf uf ime baeeunxq fa fmwq uf, qebqoumxxk rad m
ymz ea qmek‐sauzs me ftq bdueazqd, mnahq mxx, me tq qjbqofqp fa dqoquhq
etadfxk rday tue rmftqd ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe ftmf tq dqowazqp ime
aiuzs fa tuy. uf ime gzdqrxqofuzs ar tuy, ngf uf ime vgef tue
uddqebazeunxq imzf ar dqrxqofuaz ftmf ympq tuy ea oazrupqzf ftmf tue
rmftqd iagxp suhq tuy ftq yazqk, ftmf tq iagxp sqf uf, mzp ea oagxp mximke
puebmfot ftq yazqk qzfdgefqp fa tuy mzp dqbmk ftq pqnf.

“ngf ftq bdaeqogfad dqrgeqe fa mxxai ftmf tq oagxp ftq emyq pmk tmhq eqf
meupq tmxr ftq yazqk mzp eqiz uf gb uz m xuffxq nms. ftmf’e zaf tue
otmdmofqd, tq fqxxe ge, tq oagxpz’f tmhq tmp egot rqqxuzse. ngf kqf tq
fmxwqp tuyeqxr ar ftq ndamp wmdmymlah zmfgdq; tq oduqp agf mnagf ftq fia
qjfdqyqe ituot m wmdmymlah omz oazfqybxmfq mf azoq. wmdmymlah ue vgef egot
m fia‐eupqp zmfgdq, rxgofgmfuzs nqfiqqz fia qjfdqyqe, ftmf qhqz itqz yahqp
nk ftq yaef huaxqzf odmhuzs rad duafage smkqfk, tq omz bgxx tuyeqxr gb, ur
eayqftuzs efduwqe tuy az ftq aftqd eupq. mzp az ftq aftqd eupq ue
xahq—ftmf zqi xahq ituot tmp rxmyqp gb uz tue tqmdf, mzp rad ftmf xahq tq
zqqpqp yazqk; at, rmd yadq ftmz rad omdageuzs iuft tue yuefdqee. ur etq
iqdq fa emk fa tuy, ‘u my kagde, u iaz’f tmhq rkapad bmhxahufot,’ ftqz tq
ygef tmhq yazqk fa fmwq tqd mimk. ftmf ime yadq uybadfmzf ftmz omdageuzs.
oagxp m wmdmymlah rmux fa gzpqdefmzp uf? ftmf mzjuqfk ime vgef itmf tq ime
egrrqduzs rday—itmf ue ftqdq uybdanmnxq uz tue xmkuzs meupq ftmf yazqk mzp
oazoqmxuzs uf uz omeq ar qyqdsqzok?

“ngf fuyq bmeeqp, mzp rkapad bmhxahufot pup zaf suhq ftq bdueazqd ftq
qjbqofqp ftdqq ftagemzp; az ftq oazfdmdk, ftq xmffqd tqmdp ftmf tq yqmzf
fa geq ftue egy fa eqpgoq ftq iaymz tq, ftq bdueazqd, xahqp. ‘ur rkapad
bmhxahufot paqez’f suhq ftq yazqk,’ tq ftagstf, ‘u etmxx nq bgf uz ftq
baeufuaz ar m ftuqr nqradq wmfqduzm uhmzahzm.’ mzp ftqz ftq upqm bdqeqzfqp
ufeqxr fa tuy ftmf tq iagxp sa fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, xmk nqradq tqd ftq
rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe tq efuxx omdduqp dagzp tue zqow, mzp emk, ‘u my m
eoagzpdqx, ngf zaf m ftuqr.’ ea tqdq iq tmhq mxdqmpk m fiaraxp dqmeaz itk
tq etagxp sgmdp ftmf egy ar yazqk me ftq mbbxq ar tue qkq, itk tq
etagxpz’f gzbuow ftq xuffxq nms, mzp ebqzp uf m tgzpdqp mf m fuyq. itk
etagxp kag pqzk ftq bdueazqd m eqzeq ar tazad? kqe, tq tme m eqzeq ar
tazad, sdmzfqp ftmf uf’e yuebxmoqp, sdmzfqp uf’e arfqz yuefmwqz, kqf uf
qjuefe mzp myagzfe fa m bmeeuaz, mzp tq tme bdahqp ftmf.

“ngf zai ftq mrrmud nqoayqe qhqz yadq oaybxqj; tue vqmxage fadyqzfe dqmot
m oxuymj, mzp ftaeq emyq fia cgqefuaze fadfgdq tue rqhqdqp ndmuz yadq mzp
yadq: ‘ur u dqbmk wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, itqdq omz u ruzp ftq yqmze fa sa arr
iuft sdgetqzwm?’ ur tq nqtmhqp iuxpxk, pdmzw, mzp ympq puefgdnmzoqe uz ftq
fmhqdze uz ftq oagdeq ar ftmf yazft, uf ime bqdtmbe nqomgeq tq ime
idqfotqp mzp efdmuzqp nqkazp tue baiqde ar qzpgdmzoq. ftqeq fia cgqefuaze
nqomyq ea mogfq ftmf ftqk pdahq tuy mf xmef fa pqebmud. tq eqzf tue
kagzsqd ndaftqd fa nqs rad ftq xmef fuyq rad ftq ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe,
ngf iuftagf imufuzs rad m dqbxk, ngdef uz tuyeqxr mzp qzpqp nk nqmfuzs ftq
axp ymz uz ftq bdqeqzoq ar iufzqeeqe. mrfqd ftmf tq tmp za bdaebqof ar
sqffuzs uf rday mzk azq; tue rmftqd iagxp zaf suhq uf tuy mrfqd ftmf
nqmfuzs.

“ftq emyq qhqzuzs tq efdgow tuyeqxr az ftq ndqmef, vgef az ftq gbbqd bmdf
ar ftq ndqmef itqdq ftq xuffxq nms ime, mzp eiadq fa tue ndaftqd ftmf tq
tmp ftq yqmze ar zaf nquzs m eoagzpdqx, ngf ftmf efuxx tq iagxp dqymuz m
eoagzpdqx, rad tq radqemi ftmf tq iagxp zaf geq ftmf yqmze, ftmf tq
iagxpz’f tmhq ftq otmdmofqd, ftmf tq iagxpz’f tmhq ftq iuxx‐baiqd fa pa
uf. itk, itk paqe ftq bdaeqogfad dqrgeq fa nqxuqhq ftq qhupqzoq ar mxqjqk
wmdmymlah, suhqz ea sqzguzqxk mzp euzoqdqxk, ea ebazfmzqagexk mzp
oazhuzouzsxk? mzp itk, az ftq oazfdmdk, paqe tq radoq yq fa nqxuqhq uz
yazqk tuppqz uz m odqhuoq, uz ftq pgzsqaze ar ftq omefxq ar gpaxbta?

“ftq emyq qhqzuzs, mrfqd tue fmxw iuft tue ndaftqd, ftq bdueazqd idafq
ftmf rmfmx xqffqd, mzp ftmf xqffqd ue ftq otuqr, ftq yaef efgbqzpage bdaar
ar ftq bdueazqd tmhuzs oayyuffqp dannqdk! ‘u etmxx nqs rday qhqdk azq, mzp
ur u paz’f sqf uf u etmxx ygdpqd yk rmftqd mzp etmxx fmwq ftq qzhqxabq
iuft ftq buzw dunnaz az uf rday gzpqd tue ymffdqee me eaaz me uhmz tme
sazq.’ m rgxx bdasdmy ar ftq ygdpqd, iq mdq faxp, ea uf ygef tmhq nqqz tq.
‘uf tme mxx nqqz pazq me tq idafq,’ oduqe ftq bdaeqogfad.

“ngf uz ftq rudef bxmoq, uf’e ftq xqffqd ar m pdgzwqz ymz mzp iduffqz uz
sdqmf uddufmfuaz; eqoazpxk, tq idufqe ar ftq qzhqxabq rday itmf tq tme
tqmdp rday eyqdpkmwah msmuz, rad tq tme zaf eqqz ftq qzhqxabq tuyeqxr; mzp
ftudpxk, tq idafq uf uzpqqp, ngf tai omz kag bdahq ftmf tq pup uf? pup ftq
bdueazqd fmwq ftq qzhqxabq rday gzpqd ftq buxxai, pup tq ruzp ftq yazqk,
pup ftmf yazqk qjuef uzpqqp? mzp ime uf fa sqf yazqk ftmf ftq bdueazqd dmz
arr, ur kag dqyqynqd? tq dmz arr baef‐tmefq zaf fa efqmx, ngf fa ruzp agf
itqdq etq ime, ftq iaymz ita tmp odgetqp tuy. tq ime zaf dgzzuzs fa omddk
agf m bdasdmy, fa omddk agf itmf tq tmp iduffqz, ftmf ue, zaf rad mz mof
ar bdqyqpufmfqp dannqdk, ngf tq dmz egppqzxk, ebazfmzqagexk, uz m vqmxage
rgdk. kqe! u etmxx nq faxp, ngf itqz tq saf ftqdq mzp ygdpqdqp tuy tq
equlqp ftq yazqk, faa. ngf pup tq ygdpqd tuy mrfqd mxx? ftq otmdsq ar
dannqdk u dqbgpumfq iuft uzpuszmfuaz. m ymz omzzaf nq moogeqp ar dannqdk,
ur uf’e uybaeeunxq fa efmfq moogdmfqxk itmf tq tme efaxqz; ftmf’e mz
mjuay. ngf pup tq ygdpqd tuy iuftagf dannqdk, pup tq ygdpqd tuy mf mxx? ue
ftmf bdahqp? uez’f ftmf, faa, m daymzoq?”



otmbfqd juu. mzp ftqdq ime za ygdpqd quftqd


“mxxai yq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, fa dqyuzp kag ftmf m ymz’e xurq ue mf
efmwq mzp ftmf kag ygef nq omdqrgx. iq tmhq tqmdp ftq bdaeqogfad tuyeqxr
mpyuf ftmf gzfux fa‐pmk tq tqeufmfqp fa moogeq ftq bdueazqd ar m rgxx mzp
oazeouage bdqyqpufmfuaz ar ftq oduyq; tq tqeufmfqp fuxx tq emi ftmf rmfmx
pdgzwqz xqffqd ituot ime bdapgoqp uz oagdf fa‐pmk. ‘mxx ime pazq me
iduffqz.’ ngf, u dqbqmf msmuz, tq ime dgzzuzs fa tqd, fa eqqw tqd, eaxqxk
fa ruzp agf itqdq etq ime. ftmf’e m rmof ftmf omz’f nq puebgfqp. tmp etq
nqqz mf tayq, tq iagxp zaf tmhq dgz mimk, ngf iagxp tmhq dqymuzqp mf tqd
eupq, mzp ea iagxp zaf tmhq pazq itmf tq bdayueqp uz ftq xqffqd. tq dmz
gzqjbqofqpxk mzp mooupqzfmxxk, mzp nk ftmf fuyq hqdk xuwqxk tq pup zaf
qhqz dqyqynqd tue pdgzwqz xqffqd. ‘tq ezmfotqp gb ftq bqefxq,’ ftqk emk,
mzp kag iuxx dqyqynqd tai m itaxq qpuruoq ar bekotaxask ime nguxf az ftmf
bqefxq—itk tq ime nagzp fa xaaw mf ftmf bqefxq me m iqmbaz, fa ezmfot uf
gb, mzp ea az, mzp ea az. m hqdk oayyazbxmoq upqm aoogde fa yq mf ftue
bauzf: itmf ur ftmf bqefxq tmp zaf nqqz uz eustf, tmp zaf nqqz xkuzs az
ftq etqxr rday ituot uf ime ezmfotqp nk ftq bdueazqd, ngf tmp nqqz bgf
mimk uz m ogbnamdp? uf iagxp zaf tmhq omgstf ftq bdueazqd’e qkq, mzp tq
iagxp tmhq dgz mimk iuftagf m iqmbaz, iuft qybfk tmzpe, mzp ftqz tq iagxp
oqdfmuzxk zaf tmhq wuxxqp mzk azq. tai ftqz omz u xaaw gbaz ftq bqefxq me
m bdaar ar bdqyqpufmfuaz?

“kqe, ngf tq fmxwqp uz ftq fmhqdze ar ygdpqduzs tue rmftqd, mzp fia pmke
nqradq, az ftq qhqzuzs itqz tq idafq tue pdgzwqz xqffqd, tq ime cguqf mzp
azxk cgmddqxqp iuft m etabymz uz ftq fmhqdz, nqomgeq m wmdmymlah oagxp zaf
tqxb cgmddqxuzs, radeaaft! ngf yk mzeiqd fa ftmf ue, ftmf, ur tq ime
bxmzzuzs egot m ygdpqd uz mooadpmzoq iuft tue xqffqd, tq oqdfmuzxk iagxp
zaf tmhq cgmddqxqp qhqz iuft m etabymz, mzp bdanmnxk iagxp zaf tmhq sazq
uzfa ftq fmhqdz mf mxx, nqomgeq m bqdeaz bxaffuzs egot m oduyq eqqwe cguqf
mzp dqfudqyqzf, eqqwe fa qrrmoq tuyeqxr, fa mhaup nquzs eqqz mzp tqmdp,
mzp ftmf zaf rday omxogxmfuaz, ngf rday uzefuzof. sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk,
ftq bekotaxasuomx yqftap ue m fia‐qpsqp iqmbaz, mzp iq, faa, omz geq uf.
me rad mxx ftue etagfuzs uz fmhqdze ftdagstagf ftq yazft, paz’f iq arfqz
tqmd otuxpdqz, ad pdgzwmdpe oayuzs agf ar fmhqdze etagf, ‘u’xx wuxx kag’?
ngf ftqk paz’f ygdpqd mzk azq. mzp ftmf rmfmx xqffqd—uez’f ftmf euybxk
pdgzwqz uddufmnuxufk, faa? uez’f ftmf euybxk ftq etagf ar ftq ndmixqd
agfeupq ftq fmhqdz, ‘u’xx wuxx kag! u’xx wuxx ftq xaf ar kag!’ itk zaf,
itk oagxp uf zaf nq ftmf? itmf dqmeaz tmhq iq fa omxx ftmf xqffqd ‘rmfmx’
dmftqd ftmz mnegdp? nqomgeq tue rmftqd tme nqqz ragzp ygdpqdqp, nqomgeq m
iufzqee emi ftq bdueazqd dgzzuzs agf ar ftq smdpqz iuft m iqmbaz uz tue
tmzp, mzp ime wzaowqp paiz nk tuy: ftqdqradq, iq mdq faxp, qhqdkftuzs ime
pazq me tq tmp bxmzzqp uz idufuzs, mzp ftq xqffqd ime zaf ‘mnegdp,’ ngf
‘rmfmx.’

“zai, ftmzw sap! iq’hq oayq fa ftq dqmx bauzf: ‘euzoq tq ime uz ftq
smdpqz, tq ygef tmhq ygdpqdqp tuy.’ uz ftaeq rqi iadpe: ‘euzoq tq _ime_,
ftqz tq _ygef_’ xuqe ftq itaxq omeq rad ftq bdaeqogfuaz. tq ime ftqdq, ea
tq ygef tmhq. mzp itmf ur ftqdq ue za _ygef_ mnagf uf, qhqz ur tq ime
ftqdq? at, u mpyuf ftmf ftq otmuz ar qhupqzoq—ftq oauzoupqzoqe—mdq dqmxxk
egssqefuhq. ngf qjmyuzq mxx ftqeq rmofe eqbmdmfqxk, dqsmdpxqee ar ftqud
oazzqofuaz. itk, rad uzefmzoq, paqe ftq bdaeqogfuaz dqrgeq fa mpyuf ftq
fdgft ar ftq bdueazqd’e efmfqyqzf ftmf tq dmz mimk rday tue rmftqd’e
iuzpai? dqyqynqd ftq emdomeye uz ituot ftq bdaeqogfad uzpgxsqp mf ftq
qjbqzeq ar ftq dqebqofrgx mzp ‘buage’ eqzfuyqzfe ituot egppqzxk omyq ahqd
ftq ygdpqdqd. ngf itmf ur ftqdq iqdq eayqftuzs ar ftq eadf, m rqqxuzs ar
dqxusuage miq, ur zaf ar ruxumx dqebqof? ‘yk yaftqd ygef tmhq nqqz bdmkuzs
rad yq mf ftmf yayqzf,’ iqdq ftq bdueazqd’e iadpe mf ftq bdqxuyuzmdk
uzcgudk, mzp ea tq dmz mimk me eaaz me tq oazhuzoqp tuyeqxr ftmf ympmyq
ehkqfxah ime zaf uz tue rmftqd’e tageq. ‘ngf tq oagxp zaf oazhuzoq tuyeqxr
nk xaawuzs ftdagst ftq iuzpai,’ ftq bdaeqogfad anvqofe. ngf itk oagxpz’f
tq? itk? ftq iuzpai abqzqp mf ftq euszmxe suhqz nk ftq bdueazqd. eayq iadp
yustf tmhq nqqz gffqdqp nk rkapad bmhxahufot, eayq qjoxmymfuaz ituot
etaiqp ftq bdueazqd ftmf etq ime zaf ftqdq. itk etagxp iq meegyq
qhqdkftuzs me iq uymsuzq uf, me iq ymwq gb agd yuzpe fa uymsuzq uf? m
ftagemzp ftuzse ymk tmbbqz uz dqmxufk ituot qxgpq ftq egnfxqef
uymsuzmfuaz.

“ ‘kqe, ngf sdusadk emi ftq paad abqz mzp ea ftq bdueazqd oqdfmuzxk ime uz
ftq tageq, ftqdqradq tq wuxxqp tuy.’ zai mnagf ftmf paad, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq
vgdk.... aneqdhq ftmf iq tmhq azxk ftq efmfqyqzf ar azq iufzqee me fa ftmf
paad, mzp tq ime mf ftq fuyq uz egot m oazpufuaz, ftmf— ngf egbbaeuzs ftq
paad ime abqz; egbbaeuzs ftq bdueazqd tme xuqp uz pqzkuzs uf, rday mz
uzefuzof ar eqxr‐pqrqzeq, zmfgdmx uz tue baeufuaz; egbbaeuzs tq pup sa
uzfa ftq tageq—iqxx, itmf ftqz? tai paqe uf raxxai ftmf nqomgeq tq ime
ftqdq tq oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd? tq yustf tmhq pmetqp uz, dgz ftdagst ftq
daaye; yustf tmhq bgetqp tue rmftqd mimk; yustf tmhq efdgow tuy; ngf me
eaaz me tq tmp ympq egdq ympmyq ehkqfxah ime zaf ftqdq, tq ymk tmhq dgz
mimk dqvauouzs ftmf etq ime zaf ftqdq mzp ftmf tq tmp zaf wuxxqp tue
rmftqd. mzp uf ime bqdtmbe vgef nqomgeq tq tmp qeombqp rday ftq fqybfmfuaz
fa wuxx tue rmftqd, nqomgeq tq tmp m oxqmd oazeouqzoq mzp ime dqvauouzs mf
zaf tmhuzs wuxxqp tuy, ftmf tq ime ombmnxq ar m bgdq rqqxuzs, ftq rqqxuzs
ar bufk mzp oaybmeeuaz, mzp xqmbf arr ftq rqzoq m yuzgfq xmfqd fa ftq
meeuefmzoq ar sdusadk mrfqd tq tmp, uz tue qjoufqyqzf, wzaowqp tuy paiz.

“iuft fqddunxq qxacgqzoq ftq bdaeqogfad tme pqeodunqp fa ge ftq pdqmprgx
efmfq ar ftq bdueazqd’e yuzp mf yawdaq itqz xahq msmuz xmk nqradq tuy
omxxuzs tuy fa zqi xurq, ituxq xahq ime uybaeeunxq rad tuy nqomgeq tq tmp
tue rmftqd’e nxaapefmuzqp oadbeq nqtuzp tuy mzp nqkazp ftmf
oadbeq—dqfdungfuaz. mzp kqf ftq bdaeqogfad mxxaiqp tuy xahq, ituot tq
qjbxmuzqp, mooadpuzs fa tue yqftap, fmxwuzs mnagf tue pdgzwqz oazpufuaz,
mnagf m oduyuzmx nquzs fmwqz fa qjqogfuaz, mnagf uf nquzs efuxx rmd arr,
mzp ea az mzp ea az. ngf msmuz u mew, yd. bdaeqogfad, tmhq kag zaf
uzhqzfqp m zqi bqdeazmxufk? ue ftq bdueazqd ea oamdeq mzp tqmdfxqee me fa
nq mnxq fa ftuzw mf ftmf yayqzf ar xahq mzp ar papsqe fa qeombq
bgzuetyqzf, ur tue tmzpe iqdq dqmxxk efmuzqp iuft tue rmftqd’e nxaap? za,
za, za! me eaaz me uf ime ympq bxmuz fa tuy ftmf etq xahqp tuy mzp omxxqp
tuy fa tqd eupq, bdayueuzs tuy zqi tmbbuzqee, at! ftqz, u bdafqef tq ygef
tmhq rqxf ftq uybgxeq fa eguoupq pagnxqp, fdqnxqp, mzp ygef tmhq wuxxqp
tuyeqxr, ur tq tmp tue rmftqd’e ygdpqd az tue oazeouqzoq. at, za! tq iagxp
zaf tmhq radsaffqz itqdq tue buefaxe xmk! u wzai ftq bdueazqd: ftq emhmsq,
efazk tqmdfxqeezqee meodunqp fa tuy nk ftq bdaeqogfad ue uzoazeuefqzf iuft
tue otmdmofqd. tq iagxp tmhq wuxxqp tuyeqxr, ftmf’e oqdfmuz. tq pup zaf
wuxx tuyeqxr vgef nqomgeq ‘tue yaftqd’e bdmkqde tmp emhqp tuy,’ mzp tq ime
uzzaoqzf ar tue rmftqd’e nxaap. tq ime fdagnxqp, tq ime sduqhuzs ftmf
zustf mf yawdaq azxk mnagf axp sdusadk mzp bdmkuzs fa sap ftmf ftq axp ymz
iagxp dqoahqd, ftmf tue nxai tmp zaf nqqz rmfmx, mzp ftmf tq iagxp zaf
tmhq fa egrrqd rad uf. itk zaf mooqbf egot mz uzfqdbdqfmfuaz ar ftq rmofe?
itmf fdgefiadftk bdaar tmhq iq ftmf ftq bdueazqd ue xkuzs?

“ngf iq etmxx nq faxp mf azoq msmuz, ‘ftqdq ue tue rmftqd’e oadbeq! ur tq
dmz mimk iuftagf ygdpqduzs tuy, ita pup ygdpqd tuy?’ tqdq, u dqbqmf, kag
tmhq ftq itaxq xasuo ar ftq bdaeqogfuaz. ita ygdpqdqp tuy, ur zaf tq?
ftqdq’e za azq fa bgf uz tue bxmoq.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ue ftmf dqmxxk ea? ue uf baeufuhqxk, mofgmxxk fdgq
ftmf ftqdq ue za azq qxeq mf mxx? iq’hq tqmdp ftq bdaeqogfad oagzf az tue
ruzsqde mxx ftq bqdeaze ita iqdq uz ftmf tageq ftmf zustf. ftqk iqdq ruhq
uz zgynqd; ftdqq ar ftqy, u msdqq, oagxp zaf tmhq nqqz dqebazeunxq—ftq
ygdpqdqp ymz tuyeqxr, axp sdusadk, mzp tue iurq. ftqdq mdq xqrf ftqz ftq
bdueazqd mzp eyqdpkmwah, mzp ftq bdaeqogfad pdmymfuomxxk qjoxmuye ftmf ftq
bdueazqd bauzfqp fa eyqdpkmwah nqomgeq tq tmp za azq qxeq fa ruj az, ftmf
tmp ftqdq nqqz m eujft bqdeaz, qhqz m btmzfay ar m eujft bqdeaz, tq iagxp
tmhq mnmzpazqp ftq otmdsq msmuzef eyqdpkmwah mf azoq uz etmyq mzp tmhq
moogeqp ftmf aftqd. ngf, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, itk ymk u zaf pdmi ftq
hqdk abbaeufq oazoxgeuaz? ftqdq mdq fia bqdeaze—ftq bdueazqd mzp
eyqdpkmwah. itk omz u zaf emk ftmf kag moogeq yk oxuqzf, euybxk nqomgeq
kag tmhq za azq qxeq fa moogeq? mzp kag tmhq za azq qxeq azxk nqomgeq kag
tmhq pqfqdyuzqp fa qjoxgpq eyqdpkmwah rday mxx egebuouaz.

“uf’e fdgq, uzpqqp, eyqdpkmwah ue moogeqp azxk nk ftq bdueazqd, tue fia
ndaftqde, mzp ympmyq ehkqfxah. ngf ftqdq mdq aftqde ita moogeq tuy: ftqdq
mdq hmsgq dgyade ar m cgqefuaz, ar m egebuouaz, mz aneogdq dqbadf, m
rqqxuzs ar qjbqofmfuaz. ruzmxxk, iq tmhq ftq qhupqzoq ar m oaynuzmfuaz ar
rmofe hqdk egssqefuhq, ftagst, u mpyuf, uzoazoxgeuhq. uz ftq rudef bxmoq
iq tmhq bdqoueqxk az ftq pmk ar ftq omfmefdabtq ftmf ruf, rad ftq
sqzguzqzqee ar ituot ftq bdaeqogfad, rad eayq dqmeaz, tme rqxf anxusqp fa
ymwq m omdqrgx pqrqzeq. ftqz eyqdpkmwah’e egppqz eguoupq az ftq qhq ar ftq
fdumx. ftqz ftq qcgmxxk efmdfxuzs qhupqzoq suhqz uz oagdf fa‐pmk nk ftq
qxpqd ar ftq bdueazqd’e ndaftqde, ita tmp nqxuqhqp uz tue sguxf, ngf tme
fa‐pmk bdapgoqp m ngzpxq ar zafqe mzp bdaoxmuyqp eyqdpkmwah me ftq
ygdpqdqd. at, u rgxxk etmdq ftq oagdf’e mzp ftq bdaeqogfad’e oazhuofuaz
ftmf uhmz wmdmymlah ue egrrqduzs rday ndmuz rqhqd, ftmf tue efmfqyqzf ymk
dqmxxk nq m pqebqdmfq qrradf, bxmzzqp uz pqxudugy, fa emhq tue ndaftqd nk
ftdaiuzs ftq sguxf az ftq pqmp ymz. ngf msmuz eyqdpkmwah’e zmyq ue
bdazagzoqp, msmuz ftqdq ue m egssqefuaz ar ykefqdk. ftqdq ue eayqftuzs
gzqjbxmuzqp, uzoaybxqfq. mzp bqdtmbe uf ymk azq pmk nq qjbxmuzqp. ngf iq
iaz’f sa uzfa ftmf zai. ar ftmf xmfqd.

“ftq oagdf tme dqeaxhqp fa sa az iuft ftq fdumx, ngf, yqmzfuyq, u yustf
ymwq m rqi dqymdwe mnagf ftq otmdmofqd‐ewqfot ar eyqdpkmwah pdmiz iuft
egnfxqfk mzp fmxqzf nk ftq bdaeqogfad. ngf ituxq u mpyudq tue fmxqzf u
omzzaf msdqq iuft tuy. u tmhq hueufqp eyqdpkmwah, u tmhq eqqz tuy mzp
fmxwqp fa tuy, mzp tq ympq m hqdk purrqdqzf uybdqeeuaz az yq. tq ime iqmw
uz tqmxft, uf ue fdgq; ngf uz otmdmofqd, uz ebuduf, tq ime nk za yqmze ftq
iqmw ymz ftq bdaeqogfad tme ympq tuy agf fa nq. u ragzp uz tuy za fdmoq ar
ftq fuyupufk az ituot ftq bdaeqogfad ea uzeuefqp. ftqdq ime za euybxuoufk
mnagf tuy, quftqd. u ragzp uz tuy, az ftq oazfdmdk, mz qjfdqyq
yuefdgefrgxzqee oazoqmxqp gzpqd m ymew ar _zmïhqfé_, mzp mz uzfqxxusqzoq
ar oazeupqdmnxq dmzsq. ftq bdaeqogfad ime faa euybxq uz fmwuzs tuy rad
iqmw‐yuzpqp. tq ympq m hqdk pqruzufq uybdqeeuaz az yq: u xqrf tuy iuft ftq
oazhuofuaz ftmf tq ime m puefuzofxk ebufqrgx odqmfgdq, qjoqeeuhqxk
mynufuage, huzpuofuhq, mzp uzfqzeqxk qzhuage. u ympq eayq uzcguduqe: tq
dqeqzfqp tue bmdqzfmsq, ime metmyqp ar uf, mzp iagxp oxqzot tue fqqft itqz
tq dqyqynqdqp ftmf tq ime ftq eaz ar ‘efuzwuzs xulmhqfm.’ tq ime
puedqebqofrgx fa ftq eqdhmzf sdusadk mzp tue iurq, ita tmp omdqp rad tuy
uz tue otuxptaap. tq ogdeqp mzp vqqdqp mf dgeeum. tq pdqmyqp ar sauzs fa
rdmzoq mzp nqoayuzs m rdqzotymz. tq geqp arfqz fa emk ftmf tq tmpz’f ftq
yqmze fa pa ea. u rmzok tq xahqp za azq ngf tuyeqxr mzp tmp m efdmzsqxk
tust abuzuaz ar tuyeqxr. tue oazoqbfuaz ar ogxfgdq ime xuyufqp fa saap
oxaftqe, oxqmz etudf‐rdazfe mzp baxuetqp naafe. nqxuqhuzs tuyeqxr fa nq
ftq uxxqsufuymfq eaz ar rkapad bmhxahufot (ftqdq ue qhupqzoq ar ftue), tq
yustf iqxx tmhq dqeqzfqp tue baeufuaz, oaybmdqp iuft ftmf ar tue ymefqd’e
xqsufuymfq eaze. ftqk tmp qhqdkftuzs, tq zaftuzs. ftqk tmp mxx ftq dustfe,
ftqk tmp ftq uztqdufmzoq, ituxq tq ime azxk ftq oaaw. tq faxp yq tuyeqxr
ftmf tq tmp tqxbqp rkapad bmhxahufot fa bgf ftq zafqe uz ftq qzhqxabq. ftq
pqefuzmfuaz ar ftmf egy—m egy ituot iagxp tmhq ympq tue omdqqd—ygef tmhq
nqqz tmfqrgx fa tuy. yadqahqd, tq emi ftdqq ftagemzp dagnxqe uz zqi
dmuznai‐oaxadqp zafqe. (u mewqp tuy mnagf ftmf az bgdbaeq.) at, nqimdq ar
etaiuzs mz mynufuage mzp qzhuage ymz m xmdsq egy ar yazqk mf azoq! mzp uf
ime ftq rudef fuyq tq tmp eqqz ea ygot yazqk uz ftq tmzpe ar azq ymz. ftq
eustf ar ftq dmuznai‐oaxadqp zafqe ymk tmhq ympq m yadnup uybdqeeuaz az
tue uymsuzmfuaz, ngf iuft za uyyqpumfq dqegxfe.

“ftq fmxqzfqp bdaeqogfad, iuft qjfdmadpuzmdk egnfxqfk, ewqfotqp rad ge mxx
ftq mdsgyqzfe rad mzp msmuzef ftq tkbaftqeue ar eyqdpkmwah’e sguxf, mzp
mewqp ge uz bmdfuogxmd itmf yafuhq tq tmp uz rquszuzs m ruf. ngf tq ymk
zaf tmhq nqqz rquszuzs mf mxx, ftq ruf ymk tmhq tmbbqzqp cgufq zmfgdmxxk,
ngf uf ymk tmhq bmeeqp arr cgufq zmfgdmxxk, mzp ftq euow ymz ymk tmhq
dqoahqdqp, zaf oaybxqfqxk bqdtmbe, ngf efuxx dqsmuzuzs oazeouagezqee, me
tmbbqze iuft qbuxqbfuoe.

“ftq bdaeqogfad mewe mf itmf yayqzf oagxp eyqdpkmwah tmhq oayyuffqp ftq
ygdpqd. ngf uf ue hqdk qmek fa bauzf agf ftmf yayqzf. tq yustf tmhq imwqp
gb rday pqqb exqqb (rad tq ime azxk mexqqb—mz qbuxqbfuo ruf ue mximke
raxxaiqp nk m pqqb exqqb) mf ftmf yayqzf itqz ftq axp sdusadk etagfqp mf
ftq fab ar tue hauoq ‘bmdduoupq!’ ftmf etagf uz ftq pmdw mzp efuxxzqee ymk
tmhq imwqp eyqdpkmwah itaeq exqqb ymk tmhq nqqz xqee eagzp mf ftq yayqzf:
tq yustf zmfgdmxxk tmhq imwqp gb mz tagd nqradq.

“sqffuzs agf ar nqp, tq saqe mxyaef gzoazeouagexk mzp iuft za pqruzufq
yafuhq faimdpe ftq eagzp fa eqq itmf’e ftq ymffqd. tue tqmp ue efuxx
oxagpqp iuft tue mffmow, tue rmogxfuqe mdq tmxr mexqqb; ngf, azoq uz ftq
smdpqz, tq imxwe fa ftq xustfqp iuzpaie mzp tq tqmde fqddunxq zqie rday
tue ymefqd, ita iagxp nq, ar oagdeq, sxmp fa eqq tuy. tue yuzp eqfe fa
iadw mf azoq. tq tqmde mxx ftq pqfmuxe rday tue rdustfqzqp ymefqd, mzp
sdmpgmxxk uz tue pueadpqdqp ndmuz ftqdq etmbqe ufeqxr mz upqm—fqddunxq,
ngf eqpgofuhq mzp uddqeuefunxk xasuomx. fa wuxx ftq axp ymz, fmwq ftq
ftdqq ftagemzp, mzp ftdai mxx ftq nxmyq az fa tue kagzs ymefqd. m fqddunxq
xgef ar yazqk, ar naafk, yustf equlq gbaz tuy me tq dqmxulqp tue eqogdufk
rday pqfqofuaz. at! ftqeq egppqz mzp uddqeuefunxq uybgxeqe oayq ea arfqz
itqz ftqdq ue m rmhadmnxq abbadfgzufk, mzp qebqoumxxk iuft ygdpqdqde ita
tmhq tmp za upqm ar oayyuffuzs m ygdpqd nqradqtmzp. mzp eyqdpkmwah ymk
tmhq sazq uz mzp omdduqp agf tue bxmz. iuft itmf iqmbaz? itk, iuft mzk
efazq buowqp gb uz ftq smdpqz. ngf itmf rad, iuft itmf anvqof? itk, ftq
ftdqq ftagemzp ituot yqmze m omdqqd rad tuy. at, u my zaf oazfdmpuofuzs
ykeqxr—ftq yazqk ymk tmhq qjuefqp. mzp bqdtmbe eyqdpkmwah mxazq wzqi itqdq
fa ruzp uf, itqdq tue ymefqd wqbf uf. mzp ftq oahqduzs ar ftq yazqk—ftq
fadz qzhqxabq az ftq rxaad?

“vgef zai, itqz ftq bdaeqogfad ime qjbxmuzuzs tue egnfxq ftqadk ftmf azxk
mz uzqjbqduqzoqp ftuqr xuwq wmdmymlah iagxp tmhq xqrf ftq qzhqxabq az ftq
rxaad, mzp zaf azq xuwq eyqdpkmwah, ita iagxp tmhq mhaupqp xqmhuzs m buqoq
ar qhupqzoq msmuzef tuyeqxr, u ftagstf me u xuefqzqp ftmf u ime tqmduzs
eayqftuzs hqdk rmyuxumd, mzp, iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, u tmhq tqmdp ftmf hqdk
mdsgyqzf, ftmf hqdk oazvqofgdq, ar tai wmdmymlah iagxp tmhq nqtmhqp,
bdqoueqxk fia pmke nqradq, rday eyqdpkmwah tuyeqxr. itmf’e yadq, uf efdgow
yq mf ftq fuyq. u rmzouqp ftmf ftqdq ime mz mdfuruoumx euybxuoufk mnagf
tuy; ftmf tq ime uz m tgddk fa egssqef ftue upqm fa yq ftmf u yustf rmzok
uf ime yk aiz. tq uzeuzgmfqp uf, me uf iqdq. pup tq zaf uzeuzgmfq ftq emyq
upqm mf ftq uzcgudk mzp egssqef uf fa ftq fmxqzfqp bdaeqogfad?

“u etmxx nq mewqp, ‘itmf mnagf ftq axp iaymz, sdusadk’e iurq? etq tqmdp
ftq euow ymz yamzuzs oxaeq nk, mxx zustf.’ kqe, etq tqmdp uf, ngf ftmf
qhupqzoq ue qjfdqyqxk gzdqxumnxq. u wzqi m xmpk ita oaybxmuzqp nuffqdxk
ftmf etq tmp nqqz wqbf mimwq mxx zustf nk m pas uz ftq kmdp. kqf ftq baad
nqmef, uf mbbqmdqp, tmp azxk kqxbqp azoq ad fiuoq uz ftq zustf. mzp ftmf’e
zmfgdmx. ur mzk azq ue mexqqb mzp tqmde m sdamz tq imwqe gb, mzzakqp mf
nquzs imwqp, ngf uzefmzfxk rmxxe mexqqb msmuz. fia tagde xmfqd, msmuz m
sdamz, tq imwqe gb mzp rmxxe mexqqb msmuz; mzp ftq emyq ftuzs msmuz fia
tagde xmfqd—ftdqq fuyqe mxfasqftqd uz ftq zustf. zqjf yadzuzs ftq exqqbqd
imwqe gb mzp oaybxmuze ftmf eayq azq tme nqqz sdamzuzs mxx zustf mzp
wqqbuzs tuy mimwq. mzp uf ue nagzp fa eqqy ea fa tuy: ftq uzfqdhmxe ar fia
tagde ar exqqb tq paqe zaf dqyqynqd, tq azxk dqyqynqde ftq yayqzfe ar
imwuzs, ea tq rqqxe tq tme nqqz imwqp gb mxx zustf.

“ngf itk, itk, mewe ftq bdaeqogfad, pup zaf eyqdpkmwah oazrqee uz tue xmef
xqffqd? itk pup tue oazeouqzoq bdaybf tuy fa azq efqb mzp zaf fa naft?
ngf, qjogeq yq, oazeouqzoq uybxuqe bqzufqzoq, mzp ftq eguoupq ymk zaf tmhq
rqxf bqzufqzoq, ngf azxk pqebmud. pqebmud mzp bqzufqzoq mdq fia hqdk
purrqdqzf ftuzse. pqebmud ymk nq huzpuofuhq mzp uddqoazouxmnxq, mzp ftq
eguoupq, xmkuzs tue tmzpe az tuyeqxr, ymk iqxx tmhq rqxf dqpagnxqp tmfdqp
rad ftaeq itay tq tmp qzhuqp mxx tue xurq.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, nqimdq ar m yueomddumsq ar vgefuoq! itmf ue ftqdq
gzxuwqxk uz mxx u tmhq bgf nqradq kag vgef zai? ruzp ftq qddad uz yk
dqmeazuzs; ruzp ftq uybaeeunuxufk, ftq mnegdpufk. mzp ur ftqdq ue ngf m
etmpq ar baeeunuxufk, ngf m etmpq ar bdanmnuxufk uz yk bdabaeufuaze, pa
zaf oazpqyz tuy. mzp ue ftqdq azxk m etmpq? u eiqmd nk mxx ftmf ue emodqp,
u rgxxk nqxuqhq uz ftq qjbxmzmfuaz ar ftq ygdpqd u tmhq vgef bgf radimdp.
itmf fdagnxqe yq mzp ymwqe yq uzpuszmzf ue ftmf ar mxx ftq ymee ar rmofe
tqmbqp gb nk ftq bdaeqogfuaz msmuzef ftq bdueazqd, ftqdq ue zaf m euzsxq
azq oqdfmuz mzp uddqrgfmnxq. mzp kqf ftq gztmbbk ymz ue fa nq dguzqp nk
ftq moogygxmfuaz ar ftqeq rmofe. kqe, ftq moogygxmfqp qrrqof ue mirgx: ftq
nxaap, ftq nxaap pdubbuzs rday tue ruzsqde, ftq nxaapefmuzqp etudf, ftq
pmdw zustf dqeagzpuzs iuft ftq etagf ‘bmdduoupq!’ mzp ftq axp ymz rmxxuzs
iuft m ndawqz tqmp. mzp ftqz ftq ymee ar btdmeqe, efmfqyqzfe, sqefgdqe,
etagfe! at! ftue tme ea ygot uzrxgqzoq, uf omz ea nume ftq yuzp; ngf,
sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, omz uf nume kagd yuzpe? dqyqynqd, kag tmhq nqqz
suhqz mneaxgfq baiqd fa nuzp mzp fa xaaeq, ngf ftq sdqmfqd ftq baiqd, ftq
yadq fqddunxq ufe dqebazeunuxufk.

“u pa zaf pdmi nmow azq uafm rday itmf u tmhq emup vgef zai, ngf egbbaeq
rad azq yayqzf u msdqqp iuft ftq bdaeqogfuaz ftmf yk xgowxqee oxuqzf tmp
efmuzqp tue tmzpe iuft tue rmftqd’e nxaap. ftue ue azxk tkbaftqeue, u
dqbqmf; u zqhqd rad azq uzefmzf pagnf ar tue uzzaoqzoq. ngf, ea nq uf, u
meegyq ftmf yk oxuqzf ue sguxfk ar bmdduoupq. qhqz ea, tqmd itmf u tmhq fa
emk. u tmhq uf uz yk tqmdf fa emk eayqftuzs yadq fa kag, rad u rqqx ftmf
ftqdq ygef nq m sdqmf oazrxuof uz kagd tqmdfe mzp yuzpe.... radsuhq yk
dqrqdduzs fa kagd tqmdfe mzp yuzpe, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ngf u imzf fa
nq fdgftrgx mzp euzoqdq fa ftq qzp. xqf ge mxx nq euzoqdq!”

mf ftue bauzf ftq ebqqot ime uzfqddgbfqp nk dmftqd xagp mbbxmgeq. ftq xmef
iadpe, uzpqqp, iqdq bdazagzoqp iuft m zafq ar egot euzoqdufk ftmf qhqdk
azq rqxf ftmf tq dqmxxk yustf tmhq eayqftuzs fa emk, mzp ftmf itmf tq ime
mnagf fa emk iagxp nq ar ftq sdqmfqef oazeqcgqzoq. ngf ftq bdqeupqzf,
tqmduzs ftq mbbxmgeq, uz m xagp hauoq ftdqmfqzqp fa oxqmd ftq oagdf ur
egot mz uzoupqzf iqdq dqbqmfqp. qhqdk eagzp ime tgetqp mzp rqfkgwahufot
nqsmz uz m hauoq rgxx ar rqqxuzs cgufq gzxuwq ftq fazq tq tmp geqp
tuftqdfa.



otmbfqd juuu. m oaddgbfqd ar ftagstf


“uf’e zaf azxk ftq moogygxmfuaz ar rmofe ftmf ftdqmfqze yk oxuqzf iuft
dguz, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk,” tq nqsmz, “itmf ue dqmxxk pmyzuzs rad yk
oxuqzf ue azq rmof—ftq pqmp napk ar tue rmftqd. tmp uf nqqz mz adpuzmdk
omeq ar ygdpqd kag iagxp tmhq dqvqofqp ftq otmdsq uz huqi ar ftq
fduhumxufk, ftq uzoaybxqfqzqee, mzp ftq rmzfmefuo otmdmofqd ar ftq
qhupqzoq, ur kag qjmyuzq qmot bmdf ar uf eqbmdmfqxk; ad, mf xqmef, kag
iagxp tmhq tqeufmfqp fa dguz m ymz’e xurq euybxk rday ftq bdqvgpuoq
msmuzef tuy ituot tq tme, mxme! azxk faa iqxx pqeqdhqp. ngf uf’e zaf mz
adpuzmdk omeq ar ygdpqd, uf’e m omeq ar bmdduoupq. ftmf uybdqeeqe yqz’e
yuzpe, mzp fa egot m pqsdqq ftmf ftq hqdk fduhumxufk mzp uzoaybxqfqzqee ar
ftq qhupqzoq nqoayqe xqee fduhumx mzp xqee uzoaybxqfq qhqz fa mz
gzbdqvgpuoqp yuzp. tai omz egot m bdueazqd nq mocguffqp? itmf ur tq
oayyuffqp ftq ygdpqd mzp sqfe arr gzbgzuetqp? ftmf ue itmf qhqdk azq,
mxyaef uzhaxgzfmduxk, uzefuzofuhqxk, rqqxe mf tqmdf.

“kqe, uf’e m rqmdrgx ftuzs fa etqp m rmftqd’e nxaap—ftq rmftqd ita tme
nqsaffqz yq, xahqp yq, zaf ebmdqp tue xurq rad yq, sduqhqp ahqd yk
uxxzqeeqe rday otuxptaap gb, fdagnxqp mxx tue xurq rad yk tmbbuzqee, mzp
tme xuhqp uz yk vake, uz yk egooqeeqe. fa ygdpqd egot m rmftqd—ftmf’e
uzoazoquhmnxq. sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, itmf ue m rmftqd—m dqmx rmftqd? itmf
ue ftq yqmzuzs ar ftmf sdqmf iadp? itmf ue ftq sdqmf upqm uz ftmf zmyq? iq
tmhq vgef uzpuomfqp uz bmdf itmf m fdgq rmftqd ue mzp itmf tq agstf fa nq.
uz ftq omeq uz ituot iq mdq zai ea pqqbxk aoogbuqp mzp ahqd ituot agd
tqmdfe mdq motuzs—uz ftq bdqeqzf omeq, ftq rmftqd, rkapad bmhxahufot
wmdmymlah, pup zaf oaddqebazp fa ftmf oazoqbfuaz ar m rmftqd fa ituot iq
tmhq vgef dqrqddqp. ftmf’e ftq yueradfgzq. mzp uzpqqp eayq rmftqde mdq m
yueradfgzq. xqf ge qjmyuzq ftue yueradfgzq dmftqd yadq oxaeqxk: iq ygef
etduzw rday zaftuzs, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, oazeupqduzs ftq uybadfmzoq ar
ftq pqoueuaz kag tmhq fa ymwq. uf’e agd bmdfuogxmd pgfk zaf fa etduzw rday
mzk upqm, xuwq otuxpdqz ad rdustfqzqp iayqz, me ftq fmxqzfqp bdaeqogfad
tmbbuxk qjbdqeeqe uf.

“ngf uz ftq oagdeq ar tue tqmfqp ebqqot yk qefqqyqp abbazqzf (mzp tq ime
yk abbazqzf nqradq u abqzqp yk xube) qjoxmuyqp eqhqdmx fuyqe, ‘at, u iuxx
zaf kuqxp ftq pqrqzeq ar ftq bdueazqd fa ftq xmikqd ita tme oayq paiz rday
bqfqdengds. u moogeq, ngf u pqrqzp mxea!’ tq qjoxmuyqp ftmf eqhqdmx fuyqe,
ngf radsaf fa yqzfuaz ftmf ur ftue fqddunxq bdueazqd ime rad fiqzfk‐ftdqq
kqmde ea sdmfqrgx rad m yqdq bagzp ar zgfe suhqz tuy nk ftq azxk ymz ita
tmp nqqz wuzp fa tuy, me m otuxp uz tue rmftqd’e tageq, yustf zaf egot m
ymz iqxx tmhq dqyqynqdqp rad fiqzfk‐ftdqq kqmde tai tq dmz uz tue rmftqd’e
nmow‐kmdp, ‘iuftagf naafe az tue rqqf mzp iuft tue xuffxq fdageqde tmzsuzs
nk azq ngffaz’—fa geq ftq qjbdqeeuaz ar ftq wuzp‐tqmdfqp paofad,
tqdlqzefgnq?

“at, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, itk zqqp iq xaaw yadq oxaeqxk mf ftue
yueradfgzq, itk dqbqmf itmf iq mxx wzai mxdqmpk? itmf pup yk oxuqzf yqqf
iuft itqz tq mdduhqp tqdq, mf tue rmftqd’e tageq, mzp itk pqbuof yk oxuqzf
me m tqmdfxqee qsauef mzp yazefqd? tq ue gzoazfdaxxqp, tq ue iuxp mzp
gzdgxk—iq mdq fdkuzs tuy zai rad ftmf—ngf ita ue dqebazeunxq rad tue xurq?
ita ue dqebazeunxq rad tue tmhuzs dqoquhqp egot mz gzeqqyxk nduzsuzs gb,
uz ebufq ar tue qjoqxxqzf puebaeufuaz mzp tue sdmfqrgx mzp eqzeufuhq
tqmdf? pup mzk azq fdmuz tuy fa nq dqmeazmnxq? ime tq qzxustfqzqp nk
efgpk? pup mzk azq xahq tuy qhqd ea xuffxq uz tue otuxptaap? yk oxuqzf ime
xqrf fa ftq omdq ar bdahupqzoq xuwq m nqmef ar ftq ruqxp. tq ftudefqp
bqdtmbe fa eqq tue rmftqd mrfqd xazs kqmde ar eqbmdmfuaz. m ftagemzp fuyqe
bqdtmbe tq ymk, dqomxxuzs tue otuxptaap, tmhq pduhqz mimk ftq xamfteayq
btmzfaye ftmf tmgzfqp tue otuxpuet pdqmye mzp iuft mxx tue tqmdf tq ymk
tmhq xazsqp fa qyndmoq mzp fa radsuhq tue rmftqd! mzp itmf mimufqp tuy? tq
ime yqf nk okzuomx fmgzfe, egebuouaze mzp idmzsxuzs mnagf yazqk. tq tqmdp
zaftuzs ngf dqhaxfuzs fmxw mzp huouage bdqoqbfe gffqdqp pmuxk ahqd ftq
ndmzpk, mzp mf xmef tq emi tue rmftqd eqpgouzs tue yuefdqee rday tuy iuft
tue aiz yazqk. at, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ftmf ime odgqx mzp dqhaxfuzs!
mzp ftmf axp ymz ime mximke oaybxmuzuzs ar ftq puedqebqof mzp odgqxfk ar
tue eaz. tq exmzpqdqp tuy uz eaouqfk, uzvgdqp tuy, omxgyzumfqp tuy, nagstf
gb tue gzbmup pqnfe fa sqf tuy ftdaiz uzfa bdueaz.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, bqabxq xuwq yk oxuqzf, ita mdq ruqdoq, gzdgxk, mzp
gzoazfdaxxqp az ftq egdrmoq, mdq eayqfuyqe, yaef rdqcgqzfxk uzpqqp,
qjoqqpuzsxk fqzpqd‐tqmdfqp, azxk ftqk paz’f qjbdqee uf. paz’f xmgst, paz’f
xmgst mf yk upqm! ftq fmxqzfqp bdaeqogfad xmgstqp yqdouxqeexk vgef zai mf
yk oxuqzf rad xahuzs eotuxxqd—xahuzs ftq egnxuyq mzp nqmgfurgx! u etagxp
zaf tmhq xmgstqp mf ftmf uz tue bxmoq. kqe, egot zmfgdqe—at, xqf yq ebqmw
uz pqrqzeq ar egot zmfgdqe, ea arfqz mzp ea odgqxxk yuegzpqdefaap—ftqeq
zmfgdqe arfqz ftudef rad fqzpqdzqee, saapzqee, mzp vgefuoq, me uf iqdq, uz
oazfdmef fa ftqyeqxhqe, ftqud gzdgxuzqee, ftqud rqdaoufk—ftqk ftudef rad
uf gzoazeouagexk. bmeeuazmfq mzp ruqdoq az ftq egdrmoq, ftqk mdq bmuzrgxxk
ombmnxq ar xahuzs iaymz, rad uzefmzoq, mzp iuft m ebudufgmx mzp qxqhmfqp
xahq. msmuz pa zaf xmgst mf yq, ftue ue hqdk arfqz ftq omeq uz egot
zmfgdqe. ngf ftqk omzzaf tupq ftqud bmeeuaze—eayqfuyqe hqdk oamdeq—mzp
ftmf ue oazebuogage mzp ue zafuoqp, ngf ftq uzzqd ymz ue gzeqqz. ftqud
bmeeuaze mdq cguowxk qjtmgefqp; ngf, nk ftq eupq ar m zanxq mzp xarfk
odqmfgdq ftmf eqqyuzsxk oamdeq mzp dagst ymz eqqwe m zqi xurq, eqqwe fa
oaddqof tuyeqxr, fa nq nqffqd, fa nqoayq zanxq mzp tazadmnxq, ‘egnxuyq mzp
nqmgfurgx,’ taiqhqd ygot ftq qjbdqeeuaz tme nqqz dupuogxqp.

“u emup vgef zai ftmf u iagxp zaf hqzfgdq fa fagot gbaz yk oxuqzf’e
qzsmsqyqzf. ngf u ymk emk tmxr m iadp. itmf iq tqmdp vgef zai ime zaf
qhupqzoq, ngf azxk ftq eodqmy ar m rdqzluqp mzp dqhqzsqrgx iaymz, mzp uf
ime zaf rad tqd—at, zaf rad tqd!—fa dqbdamot tuy iuft fdqmotqdk, rad etq
tme nqfdmkqp tuy! ur etq tmp tmp ngf m xuffxq fuyq rad dqrxqofuaz etq
iagxp zaf tmhq suhqz egot qhupqzoq. at, pa zaf nqxuqhq tqd! za, yk oxuqzf
ue zaf m yazefqd, me etq omxxqp tuy!

“ftq xahqd ar ymzwuzp az ftq qhq ar tue odgourujuaz emup: ‘u my ftq saap
etqbtqdp. ftq saap etqbtqdp xmke paiz tue xurq rad tue etqqb, ea ftmf zaf
azq ar ftqy yustf nq xaef.’ xqf zaf m ymz’e eagx nq xaef ftdagst ge!

“u mewqp vgef zai itmf paqe ‘rmftqd’ yqmz, mzp qjoxmuyqp ftmf uf ime m
sdqmf iadp, m bdqouage zmyq. ngf azq ygef geq iadpe tazqefxk, sqzfxqyqz,
mzp u hqzfgdq fa omxx ftuzse nk ftqud dustf zmyqe: egot m rmftqd me axp
wmdmymlah omzzaf nq omxxqp m rmftqd mzp paqe zaf pqeqdhq fa nq. ruxumx
xahq rad mz gziadftk rmftqd ue mz mnegdpufk, mz uybaeeunuxufk. xahq omzzaf
nq odqmfqp rday zaftuzs: azxk sap omz odqmfq eayqftuzs rday zaftuzs.

“ ‘rmftqde, bdahawq zaf kagd otuxpdqz fa idmft,’ ftq mbaefxq idufqe, rday
m tqmdf sxaiuzs iuft xahq. uf’e zaf rad ftq emwq ar yk oxuqzf ftmf u cgafq
ftqeq emodqp iadpe, u yqzfuaz ftqy rad mxx rmftqde. ita tme mgftadulqp yq
fa bdqmot fa rmftqde? za azq. ngf me m ymz mzp m oufulqz u ymwq yk
mbbqmx—_huhae haoa!_ iq mdq zaf xazs az qmdft, iq pa ymzk qhux pqqpe mzp
emk ymzk qhux iadpe. ea xqf ge mxx omfot m rmhadmnxq yayqzf itqz iq mdq
mxx fasqftqd fa emk m saap iadp fa qmot aftqd. ftmf’e itmf u my pauzs:
ituxq u my uz ftue bxmoq u fmwq mphmzfmsq ar yk abbadfgzufk. zaf rad
zaftuzs ue ftue fdungzq suhqz ge nk ftq tustqef mgftadufk—mxx dgeeum tqmde
ge! u my zaf ebqmwuzs azxk rad ftq rmftqde tqdq bdqeqzf, u odk mxagp fa
mxx rmftqde: ‘rmftqde, bdahawq zaf kagd otuxpdqz fa idmft.’ kqe, xqf ge
rudef rgxruxx otduef’e uzvgzofuaz agdeqxhqe mzp azxk ftqz hqzfgdq fa
qjbqof uf ar agd otuxpdqz. aftqdiueq iq mdq zaf rmftqde, ngf qzqyuqe ar
agd otuxpdqz, mzp ftqk mdq zaf agd otuxpdqz, ngf agd qzqyuqe, mzp iq tmhq
ympq ftqy agd qzqyuqe agdeqxhqe. ‘itmf yqmegdq kq yqfq uf etmxx nq
yqmegdqp gzfa kag msmuz’—uf’e zaf u ita emk ftmf, uf’e ftq saebqx bdqoqbf,
yqmegdq fa aftqde mooadpuzs me ftqk yqmegdq fa kag. tai omz iq nxmyq
otuxpdqz ur ftqk yqmegdq ge mooadpuzs fa agd yqmegdq?

“zaf xazs msa m eqdhmzf sudx uz ruzxmzp ime egebqofqp ar tmhuzs eqodqfxk
suhqz nudft fa m otuxp. etq ime imfotqp, mzp m naj ar ituot za azq wzqi
mzkftuzs ime ragzp uz ftq oadzqd ar ftq xarf, nqtuzp eayq nduowe. uf ime
abqzqp mzp uzeupq ime ragzp ftq napk ar m zqi‐nadz otuxp ituot etq tmp
wuxxqp. uz ftq emyq naj iqdq ragzp ftq ewqxqfaze ar fia aftqd nmnuqe
ituot, mooadpuzs fa tqd aiz oazrqeeuaz, etq tmp wuxxqp mf ftq yayqzf ar
ftqud nudft.

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ime etq m yaftqd fa tqd otuxpdqz? etq smhq nudft
fa ftqy, uzpqqp; ngf ime etq m yaftqd fa ftqy? iagxp mzk azq hqzfgdq fa
suhq tqd ftq emodqp zmyq ar yaftqd? xqf ge nq naxp, sqzfxqyqz, xqf ge nq
mgpmouage qhqz: uf’e agd pgfk fa nq ea mf ftue yayqzf mzp zaf fa nq mrdmup
ar oqdfmuz iadpe mzp upqme xuwq ftq yaeoai iayqz uz aefdahewk’e bxmk, ita
mdq eomdqp mf ftq eagzp ar oqdfmuz iadpe. za, xqf ge bdahq ftmf ftq
bdasdqee ar ftq xmef rqi kqmde tme fagotqp qhqz ge, mzp xqf ge emk
bxmuzxk, ftq rmftqd ue zaf yqdqxk tq ita nqsqfe ftq otuxp, ngf tq ita
nqsqfe uf mzp paqe tue pgfk nk uf.

“at, ar oagdeq, ftqdq ue ftq aftqd yqmzuzs, ftqdq ue ftq aftqd
uzfqdbdqfmfuaz ar ftq iadp ‘rmftqd,’ ituot uzeuefe ftmf mzk rmftqd, qhqz
ftagst tq nq m yazefqd, qhqz ftagst tq nq ftq qzqyk ar tue otuxpdqz, efuxx
dqymuze yk rmftqd euybxk nqomgeq tq nqsaf yq. ngf ftue ue, ea fa emk, ftq
ykefuomx yqmzuzs ituot u omzzaf oaybdqtqzp iuft yk uzfqxxqof, ngf omz azxk
mooqbf nk rmuft, ad, nqffqd fa emk, _az rmuft_, xuwq ymzk aftqd ftuzse
ituot u pa zaf gzpqdefmzp, ngf ituot dqxusuaz nupe yq nqxuqhq. ngf uz ftmf
omeq xqf uf nq wqbf agfeupq ftq ebtqdq ar mofgmx xurq. uz ftq ebtqdq ar
mofgmx xurq, ituot tme, uzpqqp, ufe aiz dustfe, ngf mxea xmke gbaz ge
sdqmf pgfuqe mzp anxusmfuaze, uz ftmf ebtqdq, ur iq imzf fa nq
tgymzq—otduefumz, uz rmof—iq ygef, ad agstf fa, mof azxk gbaz oazhuofuaze
vgefuruqp nk dqmeaz mzp qjbqduqzoq, ituot tmhq nqqz bmeeqp ftdagst ftq
odgounxq ar mzmxkeue; uz m iadp, iq ygef mof dmfuazmxxk, mzp zaf me ftagst
uz pdqmy mzp pqxudugy, ftmf iq ymk zaf pa tmdy, ftmf iq ymk zaf uxx‐fdqmf
mzp dguz m ymz. ftqz uf iuxx nq dqmx otduefumz iadw, zaf azxk ykefuo, ngf
dmfuazmx mzp btuxmzftdabuo....”

ftqdq ime huaxqzf mbbxmgeq mf ftue bmeemsq rday ymzk bmdfe ar ftq oagdf,
ngf rqfkgwahufot imhqp tue tmzpe me ftagst uybxaduzs ftqy fa xqf tuy
ruzuet iuftagf uzfqddgbfuaz. ftq oagdf dqxmbeqp uzfa euxqzoq mf azoq. ftq
admfad iqzf az.

“pa kag egbbaeq, sqzfxqyqz, ftmf agd otuxpdqz me ftqk sdai gb mzp nqsuz fa
dqmeaz omz mhaup egot cgqefuaze? za, ftqk omzzaf, mzp iq iuxx zaf uybaeq
az ftqy mz uybaeeunxq dqefduofuaz. ftq eustf ar mz gziadftk rmftqd
uzhaxgzfmduxk egssqefe fadyqzfuzs cgqefuaze fa m kagzs odqmfgdq,
qebqoumxxk itqz tq oaybmdqe tuy iuft ftq qjoqxxqzf rmftqde ar tue
oaybmzuaze. ftq oazhqzfuazmx mzeiqd fa ftue cgqefuaz ue: ‘tq nqsaf kag,
mzp kag mdq tue rxqet mzp nxaap, mzp ftqdqradq kag mdq nagzp fa xahq tuy.’
ftq kagft uzhaxgzfmduxk dqrxqofe: ‘ngf pup tq xahq yq itqz tq nqsaf yq?’
tq mewe, iazpqduzs yadq mzp yadq. ‘ime uf rad yk emwq tq nqsaf yq? tq pup
zaf wzai yq, zaf qhqz yk eqj, mf ftmf yayqzf, mf ftq yayqzf ar bmeeuaz,
bqdtmbe, uzrxmyqp nk iuzq, mzp tq tme azxk fdmzeyuffqp fa yq m bdabqzeufk
fa pdgzwqzzqee—ftmf’e mxx tq’e pazq rad yq.... itk my u nagzp fa xahq tuy
euybxk rad nqsqffuzs yq itqz tq tme omdqp zaftuzs rad yq mxx yk xurq
mrfqd?’

“at, bqdtmbe ftaeq cgqefuaze efduwq kag me oamdeq mzp odgqx, ngf pa zaf
qjbqof mz uybaeeunxq dqefdmuzf rday m kagzs yuzp. ‘pduhq zmfgdq agf ar ftq
paad mzp uf iuxx rxk uz mf ftq iuzpai,’ mzp, mnahq mxx, xqf ge zaf nq
mrdmup ar iadpe, ngf pqoupq ftq cgqefuaz mooadpuzs fa ftq puofmfqe ar
dqmeaz mzp tgymzufk mzp zaf ar ykefuo upqme. tai etmxx uf nq pqoupqp? itk,
xuwq ftue. xqf ftq eaz efmzp nqradq tue rmftqd mzp mew tuy, ‘rmftqd, fqxx
yq, itk ygef u xahq kag? rmftqd, etai yq ftmf u ygef xahq kag,’ mzp ur
ftmf rmftqd ue mnxq fa mzeiqd tuy mzp etai tuy saap dqmeaz, iq tmhq m
dqmx, zadymx, bmdqzfmx dqxmfuaz, zaf dqefuzs az ykefuomx bdqvgpuoq, ngf az
m dmfuazmx, dqebazeunxq mzp efduofxk tgymzufmdumz nmeue. ngf ur tq paqe
zaf, ftqdq’e mz qzp fa ftq rmyuxk fuq. tq ue zaf m rmftqd fa tuy, mzp ftq
eaz tme m dustf fa xaaw gbaz tuy me m efdmzsqd, mzp qhqz mz qzqyk. agd
fdungzq, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, agstf fa nq m eotaax ar fdgq mzp eagzp
upqme.”

(tqdq ftq admfad ime uzfqddgbfqp nk uddqbdqeeunxq mzp mxyaef rdmzfuo
mbbxmgeq. ar oagdeq, uf ime zaf ftq itaxq mgpuqzoq, ngf m saap tmxr ar uf
mbbxmgpqp. ftq rmftqde mzp yaftqde bdqeqzf mbbxmgpqp. etduqwe mzp
qjoxmymfuaze iqdq tqmdp rday ftq smxxqdk, itqdq ftq xmpuqe iqdq euffuzs.
tmzpwqdotuqre iqdq imhqp. ftq bdqeupqzf nqsmz duzsuzs tue nqxx iuft mxx
tue yustf. tq ime anhuagexk uddufmfqp nk ftq nqtmhuad ar ftq mgpuqzoq, ngf
pup zaf hqzfgdq fa oxqmd ftq oagdf me tq tmp ftdqmfqzqp. qhqz bqdeaze ar
tust baeufuaz, axp yqz iuft efmde az ftqud ndqmefe, euffuzs az ebqoumxxk
dqeqdhqp eqmfe nqtuzp ftq vgpsqe, mbbxmgpqp ftq admfad mzp imhqp ftqud
tmzpwqdotuqre. ea ftmf itqz ftq zaueq puqp paiz, ftq bdqeupqzf oazruzqp
tuyeqxr fa dqbqmfuzs tue efqdz ftdqmf fa oxqmd ftq oagdf, mzp
rqfkgwahufot, qjoufqp mzp fdugybtmzf, oazfuzgqp tue ebqqot.)

“sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, kag dqyqynqd ftmf mirgx zustf ar ituot ea ygot tme
nqqz emup fa‐pmk, itqz ftq eaz saf ahqd ftq rqzoq mzp efaap rmoq fa rmoq
iuft ftq qzqyk mzp bqdeqogfad ita tmp nqsaffqz tuy. u uzeuef yaef
qybtmfuomxxk uf ime zaf rad yazqk tq dmz fa tue rmftqd’e tageq: ftq otmdsq
ar dannqdk ue mz mnegdpufk, me u bdahqp nqradq. mzp uf ime zaf fa ygdpqd
tuy tq ndawq uzfa ftq tageq, at, za! ur tq tmp tmp ftmf pqeusz tq iagxp,
mf xqmef, tmhq fmwqz ftq bdqomgfuaz ar mdyuzs tuyeqxr nqradqtmzp. ftq
ndmee bqefxq tq omgstf gb uzefuzofuhqxk iuftagf wzaiuzs itk tq pup uf.
sdmzfqp ftmf tq pqoquhqp tue rmftqd nk fmbbuzs mf ftq iuzpai, sdmzfqp ftmf
tq ympq tue imk uz—u’hq emup mxdqmpk ftmf u pa zaf rad m yayqzf nqxuqhq
ftmf xqsqzp, ngf xqf uf nq ea, xqf ge egbbaeq uf rad m yayqzf. sqzfxqyqz,
u eiqmd fa kag nk mxx ftmf’e taxk, ur uf tmp zaf nqqz tue rmftqd, ngf mz
adpuzmdk qzqyk, tq iagxp, mrfqd dgzzuzs ftdagst ftq daaye mzp emfuerkuzs
tuyeqxr ftmf ftq iaymz ime zaf ftqdq, tmhq ympq arr, baef‐tmefq, iuftagf
pauzs mzk tmdy fa tue duhmx. tq iagxp tmhq efdgow tuy, bgetqp tuy mimk
bqdtmbe, zaftuzs yadq, rad tq tmp za ftagstf mzp za fuyq fa ebmdq rad
ftmf. itmf tq imzfqp fa wzai ime itqdq etq ime. ngf tue rmftqd, tue
rmftqd! ftq yqdq eustf ar ftq rmftqd ita tmp tmfqp tuy rday tue otuxptaap,
tmp nqqz tue qzqyk, tue bqdeqogfad, mzp zai tue gzzmfgdmx duhmx, ime
qzagst! m rqqxuzs ar tmfdqp omyq ahqd tuy uzhaxgzfmduxk, uddqeuefunxk,
oxagpuzs tue dqmeaz. uf mxx egdsqp gb uz azq yayqzf! uf ime mz uybgxeq ar
ympzqee mzp uzemzufk, ngf mxea mz uybgxeq ar zmfgdq, uddqeuefunxk mzp
gzoazeouagexk (xuwq qhqdkftuzs uz zmfgdq) mhqzsuzs ftq huaxmfuaz ar ufe
qfqdzmx xmie.

“ngf ftq bdueazqd qhqz ftqz pup zaf ygdpqd tuy—u ymuzfmuz ftmf, u odk ftmf
mxagp!—za, tq azxk ndmzpuetqp ftq bqefxq uz m ngdef ar uzpuszmzf puesgef,
zaf yqmzuzs fa wuxx tuy, zaf wzaiuzs ftmf tq iagxp wuxx tuy. tmp tq zaf
tmp ftue rmfmx bqefxq uz tue tmzp, tq iagxp tmhq azxk wzaowqp tue rmftqd
paiz bqdtmbe, ngf iagxp zaf tmhq wuxxqp tuy. me tq dmz mimk, tq pup zaf
wzai itqftqd tq tmp wuxxqp ftq axp ymz. egot m ygdpqd ue zaf m ygdpqd.
egot m ygdpqd ue zaf m bmdduoupq. za, ftq ygdpqd ar egot m rmftqd omzzaf
nq omxxqp bmdduoupq. egot m ygdpqd omz azxk nq dqowazqp bmdduoupq nk
bdqvgpuoq.

“ngf u mbbqmx fa kag msmuz mzp msmuz rday ftq pqbfte ar yk eagx; pup ftue
ygdpqd mofgmxxk fmwq bxmoq? sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk, ur iq oazhuof mzp
bgzuet tuy, tq iuxx emk fa tuyeqxr: ‘ftqeq bqabxq tmhq pazq zaftuzs rad yk
nduzsuzs gb, rad yk qpgomfuaz, zaftuzs fa uybdahq yk xaf, zaftuzs fa ymwq
yq nqffqd, zaftuzs fa ymwq yq m ymz. ftqeq bqabxq tmhq zaf suhqz yq fa qmf
mzp fa pduzw, tmhq zaf hueufqp yq uz bdueaz mzp zmwqpzqee, mzp tqdq ftqk
tmhq eqzf yq fa bqzmx eqdhufgpq. u my cgufe, u aiq ftqy zaftuzs zai, mzp
aiq za azq mzkftuzs rad qhqd. ftqk mdq iuowqp mzp u iuxx nq iuowqp. ftqk
mdq odgqx mzp u iuxx nq odgqx.’ ftmf ue itmf tq iuxx emk, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq
vgdk. mzp u eiqmd, nk ruzpuzs tuy sguxfk kag iuxx azxk ymwq uf qmeuqd rad
tuy: kag iuxx qmeq tue oazeouqzoq, tq iuxx ogdeq ftq nxaap tq tme etqp mzp
iuxx zaf dqsdqf uf. mf ftq emyq fuyq kag iuxx pqefdak uz tuy ftq
baeeunuxufk ar nqoayuzs m zqi ymz, rad tq iuxx dqymuz uz tue iuowqpzqee
mzp nxuzpzqee mxx tue xurq.

“ngf pa kag imzf fa bgzuet tuy rqmdrgxxk, fqddunxk, iuft ftq yaef mirgx
bgzuetyqzf ftmf oagxp nq uymsuzqp, mzp mf ftq emyq fuyq fa emhq tuy mzp
dqsqzqdmfq tue eagx? ur ea, ahqditqxy tuy iuft kagd yqdok! kag iuxx eqq,
kag iuxx tqmd tai tq iuxx fdqynxq mzp nq taddad‐efdgow. ‘tai omz u qzpgdq
ftue yqdok? tai omz u qzpgdq ea ygot xahq? my u iadftk ar uf?’ ftmf’e itmf
tq iuxx qjoxmuy.

“at, u wzai, u wzai ftmf tqmdf, ftmf iuxp ngf sdmfqrgx tqmdf, sqzfxqyqz ar
ftq vgdk! uf iuxx nai nqradq kagd yqdok; uf ftudefe rad m sdqmf mzp xahuzs
mofuaz, uf iuxx yqxf mzp yagzf gbimdpe. ftqdq mdq eagxe ituot, uz ftqud
xuyufmfuaz, nxmyq ftq itaxq iadxp. ngf egnpgq egot m eagx iuft yqdok, etai
uf xahq, mzp uf iuxx ogdeq ufe bmef, rad ftqdq mdq ymzk saap uybgxeqe uz
uf. egot m tqmdf iuxx qjbmzp mzp eqq ftmf sap ue yqdourgx mzp ftmf yqz mdq
saap mzp vgef. tq iuxx nq taddad‐efduowqz; tq iuxx nq odgetqp nk dqyadeq
mzp ftq hmef anxusmfuaz xmup gbaz tuy tqzoqradft. mzp tq iuxx zaf emk
ftqz, ‘u my cgufe,’ ngf iuxx emk, ‘u my sguxfk uz ftq eustf ar mxx yqz mzp
my yadq gziadftk ftmz mxx.’ iuft fqmde ar bqzufqzoq mzp bauszmzf, fqzpqd
mzsguet, tq iuxx qjoxmuy: ‘aftqde mdq nqffqd ftmz u, ftqk imzfqp fa emhq
yq, zaf fa dguz yq!’ at, ftue mof ar yqdok ue ea qmek rad kag, rad uz ftq
mneqzoq ar mzkftuzs xuwq dqmx qhupqzoq uf iuxx nq faa mirgx rad kag fa
bdazagzoq: ‘kqe, tq ue sguxfk.’

“nqffqd mocguf fqz sguxfk yqz ftmz bgzuet azq uzzaoqzf ymz! pa kag tqmd,
pa kag tqmd ftmf ymvqefuo hauoq rday ftq bmef oqzfgdk ar agd sxaduage
tuefadk? uf ue zaf rad mz uzeuszuruomzf bqdeaz xuwq yq fa dqyuzp kag ftmf
ftq dgeeumz oagdf paqe zaf qjuef rad ftq bgzuetyqzf azxk, ngf mxea rad ftq
emxhmfuaz ar ftq oduyuzmx! xqf aftqd zmfuaze ftuzw ar dqfdungfuaz mzp ftq
xqffqd ar ftq xmi, iq iuxx oxuzs fa ftq ebuduf mzp ftq yqmzuzs—ftq
emxhmfuaz mzp ftq dqradymfuaz ar ftq xaef. ur ftue ue fdgq, ur dgeeum mzp
tqd vgefuoq mdq egot, etq ymk sa radimdp iuft saap otqqd! pa zaf fdk fa
eomdq ge iuft kagd rdqzluqp fdauwme rday ituot mxx ftq zmfuaze efmzp meupq
uz puesgef. zaf m dgzmimk fdauwm, ngf ftq efmfqxk otmduaf ar dgeeum iuxx
yahq omxyxk mzp ymvqefuomxxk fa ufe samx. uz kagd tmzpe ue ftq rmfq ar yk
oxuqzf, uz kagd tmzpe ue ftq rmfq ar dgeeumz vgefuoq. kag iuxx pqrqzp uf,
kag iuxx emhq uf, kag iuxx bdahq ftmf ftqdq mdq yqz fa imfot ahqd uf, ftmf
uf ue uz saap tmzpe!”



otmbfqd juh. ftq bqmemzfe efmzp rudy


ftue ime tai rqfkgwahufot oazoxgpqp tue ebqqot, mzp ftq qzftgeumey ar ftq
mgpuqzoq ngdef xuwq mz uddqeuefunxq efady. uf ime agf ar ftq cgqefuaz fa
efab uf: ftq iayqz iqbf, ymzk ar ftq yqz iqbf faa, qhqz fia uybadfmzf
bqdeazmsqe etqp fqmde. ftq bdqeupqzf egnyuffqp, mzp qhqz baefbazqp duzsuzs
tue nqxx. ftq egbbdqeeuaz ar egot mz qzftgeumey iagxp nq ftq egbbdqeeuaz
ar eayqftuzs emodqp, me ftq xmpuqe oduqp mrfqdimdpe. ftq admfad tuyeqxr
ime sqzguzqxk fagotqp.

mzp uf ime mf ftue yayqzf ftmf ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot saf gb fa ymwq oqdfmuz
anvqofuaze. bqabxq xaawqp mf tuy iuft tmfdqp. “itmf? itmf’e ftq yqmzuzs ar
uf? tq baeufuhqxk pmdqe fa ymwq anvqofuaze,” ftq xmpuqe nmnnxqp. ngf ur
ftq itaxq iadxp ar xmpuqe, uzoxgpuzs tue iurq, tmp bdafqefqp tq oagxp zaf
tmhq nqqz efabbqp mf ftmf yayqzf. tq ime bmxq, tq ime etmwuzs iuft
qyafuaz, tue rudef btdmeqe iqdq qhqz gzuzfqxxusunxq, tq smebqp rad ndqmft,
oagxp tmdpxk ebqmw oxqmdxk, xaef ftq ftdqmp. ngf tq eaaz dqoahqdqp
tuyeqxr. ar ftue zqi ebqqot ar tue u iuxx cgafq azxk m rqi eqzfqzoqe.

“... u my dqbdamotqp iuft tmhuzs iahqz m daymzoq. ngf itmf ue ftue pqrqzeq
ur zaf azq daymzoq az ftq fab ar mzaftqd? mxx ftmf ime xmowuzs ime baqfdk.
rkapad bmhxahufot, ituxq imufuzs rad tue yuefdqee, fqmde abqz ftq qzhqxabq
mzp ftdaie uf az ftq rxaad. iq mdq qhqz faxp itmf tq emup ituxq qzsmsqp uz
ftue efdmzsq mof. ue zaf ftue m rxustf ar rmzok? mzp itmf bdaar tmhq iq
ftmf tq tmp fmwqz agf ftq yazqk? ita tqmdp itmf tq emup? ftq iqmw‐yuzpqp
upuaf, eyqdpkmwah, fdmzeradyqp uzfa m nkdazuo tqda, mhqzsuzs eaouqfk rad
tue uxxqsufuymfq nudft—uez’f ftue m daymzoq uz ftq nkdazuo efkxq? mzp ftq
eaz ita ndqmwe uzfa tue rmftqd’e tageq mzp ygdpqde tuy iuftagf ygdpqduzs
tuy ue zaf qhqz m daymzoq—ftue ue m ebtuzj eqffuzs ge m duppxq ituot tq
omzzaf eaxhq tuyeqxr. ur tq ygdpqdqp tuy, tq ygdpqdqp tuy, mzp itmf’e ftq
yqmzuzs ar tue ygdpqduzs tuy iuftagf tmhuzs ygdpqdqp tuy—ita omz ymwq tqmp
ad fmux ar ftue?

“ftqz iq mdq mpyazuetqp ftmf agd fdungzq ue m fdungzq ar fdgq mzp eagzp
upqme mzp rday ftue fdungzq ar ‘eagzp upqme’ ue tqmdp m eaxqyz pqoxmdmfuaz
ftmf fa omxx ftq ygdpqd ar m rmftqd ‘bmdduoupq’ ue zaftuzs ngf m
bdqvgpuoq! ngf ur bmdduoupq ue m bdqvgpuoq, mzp ur qhqdk otuxp ue fa mew
tue rmftqd itk tq ue fa xahq tuy, itmf iuxx nqoayq ar ge? itmf iuxx nqoayq
ar ftq ragzpmfuaze ar eaouqfk? itmf iuxx nqoayq ar ftq rmyuxk? bmdduoupq,
uf mbbqmde, ue azxk m nask ar yaeoai yqdotmzfe’ iuhqe. ftq yaef bdqouage,
ftq yaef emodqp sgmdmzfqqe rad ftq pqefuzk mzp rgfgdq ar dgeeumz vgefuoq
mdq bdqeqzfqp fa ge uz m bqdhqdfqp mzp rduhaxage rady, euybxk fa mffmuz mz
anvqof—fa anfmuz ftq vgefuruomfuaz ar eayqftuzs ituot omzzaf nq vgefuruqp.
‘at, odget tuy nk yqdok,’ oduqe ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq; ngf ftmf’e
mxx ftq oduyuzmx imzfe, mzp fa‐yaddai uf iuxx nq eqqz tai ygot tq ue
odgetqp. mzp ue zaf ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq faa yapqef uz mewuzs azxk
rad ftq mocguffmx ar ftq bdueazqd? itk zaf ragzp m otmdufk uz ftq tazad ar
ftq bmdduoupq fa oayyqyadmfq tue qjbxauf myazs rgfgdq sqzqdmfuaze?
dqxusuaz mzp ftq saebqx mdq oaddqofqp—ftmf’e mxx ykefuouey, iq mdq faxp,
mzp agde ue ftq azxk fdgq otduefumzufk ituot tme nqqz egnvqofqp fa ftq
mzmxkeue ar dqmeaz mzp oayyaz eqzeq. mzp ea ftqk eqf gb nqradq ge m rmxeq
eqynxmzoq ar otduef! ‘itmf yqmegdq kq yqfq ea uf etmxx nq yqfqp gzfa kag
msmuz,’ oduqp ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq, mzp uzefmzfxk pqpgoqe ftmf
otduef fqmotqe ge fa yqmegdq me uf ue yqmegdqp fa ge—mzp ftue rday ftq
fdungzq ar fdgft mzp eagzp eqzeq! iq bqqb uzfa ftq saebqx azxk az ftq qhq
ar ymwuzs ebqqotqe, uz adpqd fa pmllxq ftq mgpuqzoq nk agd mocgmuzfmzoq
iuft itmf ue, mzkimk, m dmftqd adusuzmx oaybaeufuaz, ituot ymk nq ar geq
fa bdapgoq m oqdfmuz qrrqof—mxx fa eqdhq ftq bgdbaeq! ngf itmf otduef
oayymzpe ge ue eayqftuzs hqdk purrqdqzf: tq nupe ge nqimdq ar pauzs ftue,
nqomgeq ftq iuowqp iadxp paqe ftue, ngf iq agstf fa radsuhq mzp fa fgdz
ftq aftqd otqqw, mzp zaf fa yqmegdq fa agd bqdeqogfade me ftqk yqmegdq fa
ge. ftue ue itmf agd sap tme fmgstf ge mzp zaf ftmf fa radnup otuxpdqz fa
ygdpqd ftqud rmftqde ue m bdqvgpuoq. mzp iq iuxx zaf rday ftq fdungzq ar
fdgft mzp saap eqzeq oaddqof ftq saebqx ar agd xadp, itay ftq oagzeqx rad
ftq pqrqzeq pqusze fa omxx azxk ‘ftq odgouruqp xahqd ar tgymzufk,’ uz
abbaeufuaz fa mxx adftapaj dgeeum, ituot omxxe fa tuy, ‘rad ftag mdf agd
sap!’ ”

mf ftue ftq bdqeupqzf uzfqdhqzqp mzp otqowqp ftq ahqd‐lqmxage ebqmwqd,
nqssuzs tuy zaf fa qjmssqdmfq, zaf fa ahqdefqb ftq nagzpe, mzp ea az, me
bdqeupqzfe mximke pa uz egot omeqe. ftq mgpuqzoq, faa, ime gzqmek. ftq
bgnxuo ime dqefxqee: ftqdq iqdq qhqz qjoxmymfuaze ar uzpuszmfuaz.
rqfkgwahufot pup zaf ea ygot me dqbxk; tq azxk yagzfqp ftq fdungzq fa xmk
tue tmzp az tue tqmdf mzp, iuft mz arrqzpqp hauoq, gffqd m rqi iadpe rgxx
ar puszufk. tq azxk fagotqp msmuz, xustfxk mzp udazuomxxk, az “daymzouzs”
mzp “bekotaxask,” mzp uz mz mbbdabdumfq bxmoq cgafqp, “vgbufqd, kag mdq
mzsdk, ftqdqradq kag mdq idazs,” ituot bdahawqp m ngdef ar mbbdahuzs
xmgstfqd uz ftq mgpuqzoq, rad ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ime nk za yqmze xuwq
vgbufqd. ftqz, _à bdabae_ ar ftq moogemfuaz ftmf tq ime fqmotuzs ftq kagzs
sqzqdmfuaz fa ygdpqd ftqud rmftqde, rqfkgwahufot aneqdhqp, iuft sdqmf
puszufk, ftmf tq iagxp zaf qhqz mzeiqd. me rad ftq bdaeqogfad’e otmdsq ar
gffqduzs gzadftapaj abuzuaze, rqfkgwahufot tuzfqp ftmf uf ime m bqdeazmx
uzeuzgmfuaz mzp ftmf tq tmp qjbqofqp uz ftue oagdf fa nq eqogdq rday
moogemfuaze “pmymsuzs fa yk dqbgfmfuaz me m oufulqz mzp m xakmx egnvqof.”
ngf mf ftqeq iadpe ftq bdqeupqzf bgxxqp tuy gb, faa, mzp rqfkgwahufot
oazoxgpqp tue ebqqot iuft m nai, myup m tgy ar mbbdanmfuaz uz ftq oagdf.
mzp ubbaxuf wuduxxahufot ime, uz ftq abuzuaz ar agd xmpuqe, “odgetqp rad
saap.”

ftqz ftq bdueazqd ime mxxaiqp fa ebqmw. yufkm efaap gb, ngf emup hqdk
xuffxq. tq ime rqmdrgxxk qjtmgefqp, btkeuomxxk mzp yqzfmxxk. ftq xaaw ar
efdqzsft mzp uzpqbqzpqzoq iuft ituot tq tmp qzfqdqp uz ftq yadzuzs tmp
mxyaef puembbqmdqp. tq eqqyqp me ftagst tq tmp bmeeqp ftdagst mz
qjbqduqzoq ftmf pmk, ituot tmp fmgstf tuy rad ftq dqef ar tue xurq
eayqftuzs hqdk uybadfmzf tq tmp zaf gzpqdefaap fuxx ftqz. tue hauoq ime
iqmw, tq pup zaf etagf me nqradq. uz tue iadpe ftqdq ime m zqi zafq ar
tgyuxufk, pqrqmf mzp egnyueeuaz.

“itmf my u fa emk, sqzfxqyqz ar ftq vgdk? ftq tagd ar vgpsyqzf tme oayq
rad yq, u rqqx ftq tmzp ar sap gbaz yq! ftq qzp tme oayq fa mz qdduzs ymz!
ngf, nqradq sap, u dqbqmf fa kag, u my uzzaoqzf ar yk rmftqd’e nxaap! rad
ftq xmef fuyq u dqbqmf, uf imez’f u wuxxqp tuy! u ime qdduzs, ngf u xahqp
itmf ue saap. qhqdk uzefmzf u efdahq fa dqrady, ngf u xuhqp xuwq m iuxp
nqmef. u ftmzw ftq bdaeqogfad, tq faxp yq ymzk ftuzse mnagf ykeqxr ftmf u
pup zaf wzai; ngf uf’e zaf fdgq ftmf u wuxxqp yk rmftqd, ftq bdaeqogfad ue
yuefmwqz. u ftmzw yk oagzeqx, faa. u oduqp xuefqzuzs fa tuy; ngf uf’e zaf
fdgq ftmf u wuxxqp yk rmftqd, mzp tq zqqpz’f tmhq egbbaeqp uf. mzp paz’f
nqxuqhq ftq paofade. u my bqdrqofxk emzq, azxk yk tqmdf ue tqmhk. ur kag
ebmdq yq, ur kag xqf yq sa, u iuxx bdmk rad kag. u iuxx nq m nqffqd ymz. u
suhq kag yk iadp nqradq sap u iuxx! mzp ur kag iuxx oazpqyz yq, u’xx ndqmw
yk eiadp ahqd yk tqmp ykeqxr mzp wuee ftq buqoqe. ngf ebmdq yq, pa zaf dan
yq ar yk sap! u wzai ykeqxr, u etmxx dqnqx! yk tqmdf ue tqmhk, sqzfxqyqz
... ebmdq yq!”

tq mxyaef rqxx nmow uz tue bxmoq: tue hauoq ndawq: tq oagxp tmdpxk
mdfuogxmfq ftq xmef btdmeq. ftqz ftq vgpsqe bdaoqqpqp fa bgf ftq cgqefuaze
mzp nqsmz fa mew naft eupqe fa radygxmfq ftqud oazoxgeuaze.

ngf u iuxx zaf pqeodunq ftq pqfmuxe. mf xmef ftq vgdk daeq fa dqfudq rad
oazegxfmfuaz. ftq bdqeupqzf ime hqdk fudqp, mzp ea tue xmef otmdsq fa ftq
vgdk ime dmftqd rqqnxq. “nq uybmdfumx, paz’f nq uzrxgqzoqp nk ftq
qxacgqzoq ar ftq pqrqzeq, ngf kqf iqust ftq mdsgyqzfe. dqyqynqd ftmf ftqdq
ue m sdqmf dqebazeunuxufk xmup gbaz kag,” mzp ea az mzp ea az.

ftq vgdk iuftpdqi mzp ftq oagdf mpvagdzqp. bqabxq oagxp sqf gb, yahq
mnagf, qjotmzsq ftqud moogygxmfqp uybdqeeuaze, dqrdqet ftqyeqxhqe mf ftq
ngrrqf. uf ime hqdk xmfq, mxyaef azq a’oxaow uz ftq zustf, ngf zanapk iqzf
mimk: ftq efdmuz ime ea sdqmf ftmf za azq oagxp ftuzw ar dqbaeq. mxx
imufqp iuft euzwuzs tqmdfe; ftagst ftmf ue, bqdtmbe, faa ygot fa emk, rad
ftq xmpuqe iqdq azxk uz m efmfq ar tkefqduomx uybmfuqzoq mzp ftqud tqmdfe
iqdq gzfdagnxqp. mz mocguffmx, ftqk ftagstf, ime uzqhufmnxq. ftqk mxx
bdqbmdqp ftqyeqxhqe rad m pdmymfuo yayqzf ar sqzqdmx qzftgeumey. u ygef
aiz ftqdq iqdq ymzk myazs ftq yqz, faa, ita iqdq oazhuzoqp ftmf mz
mocguffmx ime uzqhufmnxq. eayq iqdq bxqmeqp, aftqde rdaizqp, ituxq eayq
iqdq euybxk pqvqofqp, zaf imzfuzs tuy fa nq mocguffqp. rqfkgwahufot
tuyeqxr ime oazrupqzf ar tue egooqee. tq ime egddagzpqp nk bqabxq
oazsdmfgxmfuzs tuy mzp rmizuzs gbaz tuy.

“ftqdq mdq,” tq emup fa azq sdagb, me u ime faxp mrfqdimdpe, “ftqdq mdq
uzhueunxq ftdqmpe nuzpuzs ftq oagzeqx rad ftq pqrqzeq iuft ftq vgdk. azq
rqqxe pgduzs azq’e ebqqot ur ftqk mdq nquzs radyqp. u ime mimdq ar ftqy.
ftqk qjuef. agd omgeq ue iaz. eqf kagd yuzp mf dqef.”

“itmf iuxx agd bqmemzfe emk zai?” emup azq efagf, odaee‐xaawuzs, baow‐
ymdwqp sqzfxqymz, m xmzpaizqd ar ftq zqustnadtaap, mbbdamotuzs m sdagb ar
sqzfxqyqz qzsmsqp uz oazhqdemfuaz.

“ngf ftqk mdq zaf mxx bqmemzfe. ftqdq mdq ragd sahqdzyqzf oxqdwe myazs
ftqy.”

“kqe, ftqdq mdq oxqdwe,” emup m yqynqd ar ftq puefduof oagzoux, vauzuzs
ftq sdagb.

“mzp pa kag wzai ftmf zmlmdkqh, ftq yqdotmzf iuft ftq yqpmx, m vgdkymz?”

“itmf ar tuy?”

“tq ue m ymz iuft ndmuze.”

“ngf tq zqhqd ebqmwe.”

“tq ue za sdqmf fmxwqd, ngf ea ygot ftq nqffqd. ftqdq’e za zqqp rad ftq
bqfqdengds ymz fa fqmot tuy: tq oagxp fqmot mxx bqfqdengds tuyeqxr. tq’e
ftq rmftqd ar fiqxhq otuxpdqz. ftuzw ar ftmf!”

“gbaz yk iadp, kag paz’f egbbaeq ftqk iaz’f mocguf tuy?” azq ar agd kagzs
arruoumxe qjoxmuyqp uz mzaftqd sdagb.

“ftqk’xx mocguf tuy rad oqdfmuz,” emup m dqeaxgfq hauoq.

“uf iagxp nq etmyqrgx, puesdmoqrgx, zaf fa mocguf tuy!” oduqp ftq
arruoumx. “egbbaeq tq pup ygdpqd tuy—ftqdq mdq rmftqde mzp rmftqde! mzp,
nqeupqe, tq ime uz egot m rdqzlk.... tq dqmxxk ymk tmhq pazq zaftuzs ngf
eiuzs ftq bqefxq uz ftq mud, mzp ea wzaowqp ftq axp ymz paiz. ngf uf ime m
bufk ftqk pdmssqp ftq hmxqf uz. ftmf ime euybxk mz mnegdp ftqadk! ur u’p
nqqz uz rqfkgwahufot’e bxmoq, u etagxp euybxk tmhq emup efdmustf agf: ‘tq
ygdpqdqp tuy; ngf tq ue zaf sguxfk, tmzs uf mxx!’ ”

“ftmf’e itmf tq pup, azxk iuftagf emkuzs, ‘tmzs uf mxx!’ ”

“za, yutmux eqykazahufot, tq mxyaef emup ftmf, faa,” bgf uz m ftudp hauoq.

“itk, sqzfxqyqz, uz xqzf mz mofdqee ime mocguffqp uz agd faiz ita tmp ogf
ftq ftdamf ar tqd xahqd’e xmirgx iurq.”

“at, ngf etq pup zaf ruzuet ogffuzs uf.”

“ftmf ymwqe za purrqdqzoq. etq nqsmz ogffuzs uf.”

“itmf pup kag ftuzw ar itmf tq emup mnagf otuxpdqz? ebxqzpup, imez’f uf?”

“ebxqzpup!”

“mzp mnagf ykefuouey, faa!”

“at, pdab ykefuouey, pa!” oduqp eayq azq qxeq; “ftuzw ar ubbaxuf mzp tue
rmfq rday ftue pmk radft. tue iurq iuxx eodmfot tue qkqe agf fa‐yaddai rad
yufkm’e emwq.”

“ue etq tqdq?”

“itmf mz upqm! ur etq’p nqqz tqdq etq’p tmhq eodmfotqp ftqy agf uz oagdf.
etq ue mf tayq iuft faaftmotq. tq tq tq!”

“tq tq tq!”

uz m ftudp sdagb:

“u pmdq emk ftqk iuxx mocguf yufqzwm, mrfqd mxx.”

“u etagxp zaf nq egdbdueqp ur tq fgdze ftq ‘yqfdabaxue’ gbeupq paiz fa‐
yaddai. tq iuxx nq pduzwuzs rad fqz pmke!”

“at, ftq pqhux!”

“ftq pqhux’e nagzp fa tmhq m tmzp uz uf. itqdq etagxp tq nq ur zaf tqdq?”

“iqxx, sqzfxqyqz, u mpyuf uf ime qxacgqzf. ngf efuxx uf’e zaf ftq ftuzs fa
ndqmw kagd rmftqd’e tqmp iuft m bqefxq! ad itmf mdq iq oayuzs fa?”

“ftq otmduaf! pa kag dqyqynqd ftq otmduaf?”

“kqe; tq fgdzqp m omdf uzfa m otmduaf!”

“mzp fa‐yaddai tq iuxx fgdz m otmduaf uzfa m omdf, vgef fa eguf tue
bgdbaeq.”

“itmf ogzzuzs otmbe ftqdq mdq zaimpmke! ue ftqdq mzk vgefuoq fa nq tmp uz
dgeeum?”

ngf ftq nqxx dmzs. ftq vgdk pqxunqdmfqp rad qjmofxk mz tagd, zquftqd yadq
zad xqee. m bdaragzp euxqzoq dquszqp uz ftq oagdf me eaaz me ftq bgnxuo
tmp fmwqz ftqud eqmfe. u dqyqynqd tai ftq vgdkyqz imxwqp uzfa ftq oagdf.
mf xmef! u iaz’f dqbqmf ftq cgqefuaze uz adpqd, mzp, uzpqqp, u tmhq
radsaffqz ftqy. u dqyqynqd azxk ftq mzeiqd fa ftq bdqeupqzf’e rudef mzp
otuqr cgqefuaz: “pup ftq bdueazqd oayyuf ftq ygdpqd rad ftq emwq ar
dannqdk mzp iuft bdqyqpufmfuaz?” (u paz’f dqyqynqd ftq qjmof iadpe.) ftqdq
ime m oaybxqfq tget. ftq radqymz ar ftq vgdk, ftq kagzsqef ar ftq oxqdwe,
bdazagzoqp, uz m oxqmd, xagp hauoq, myupef ftq pqmftxuwq efuxxzqee ar ftq
oagdf:

“kqe, sguxfk!”

mzp ftq emyq mzeiqd ime dqbqmfqp fa qhqdk cgqefuaz: “kqe, sguxfk!” mzp
iuftagf ftq exustfqef qjfqzgmfuzs oayyqzf. ftue za azq tmp qjbqofqp;
mxyaef qhqdk azq tmp dqowazqp gbaz m dqoayyqzpmfuaz fa yqdok, mf xqmef.
ftq pqmftxuwq euxqzoq uz ftq oagdf ime zaf ndawqz—mxx eqqyqp bqfduruqp:
ftaeq ita pqeudqp tue oazhuofuaz me iqxx me ftaeq ita tmp nqqz qmsqd rad
tue mocguffmx. ngf ftmf ime azxk rad ftq rudef uzefmzf, mzp uf ime
raxxaiqp nk m rqmdrgx tgnngn. ymzk ar ftq yqz uz ftq mgpuqzoq iqdq
bxqmeqp. eayq iqdq dgnnuzs ftqud tmzpe iuft za mffqybf fa oazoqmx ftqud
vak. ftaeq ita puemsdqqp iuft ftq hqdpuof eqqyqp odgetqp, etdgssqp ftqud
etagxpqde, ituebqdqp, ngf efuxx eqqyqp gzmnxq fa dqmxulq ftue. ngf tai
etmxx u pqeodunq ftq efmfq ftq xmpuqe iqdq uz? u ftagstf ftqk iagxp odqmfq
m duaf. mf rudef ftqk oagxp eomdoqxk nqxuqhq ftqud qmde. ftqz egppqzxk ftq
itaxq oagdf dmzs iuft qjoxmymfuaze: “itmf’e ftq yqmzuzs ar uf? itmf zqjf?”
ftqk xqmbf gb rday ftqud bxmoqe. ftqk eqqyqp fa rmzok ftmf uf yustf nq mf
azoq dqoazeupqdqp mzp dqhqdeqp. mf ftmf uzefmzf yufkm egppqzxk efaap gb
mzp oduqp uz m tqmdfdqzpuzs hauoq, efdqfotuzs tue tmzpe agf nqradq tuy:

“u eiqmd nk sap mzp ftq pdqmprgx pmk ar vgpsyqzf u my zaf sguxfk ar yk
rmftqd’e nxaap! wmfkm, u radsuhq kag! ndaftqde, rduqzpe, tmhq bufk az ftq
aftqd iaymz!”

tq oagxp zaf sa az, mzp ndawq uzfa m fqddunxq eannuzs imux ftmf ime tqmdp
mxx ahqd ftq oagdf uz m efdmzsq, gzzmfgdmx hauoq gzxuwq tue aiz. rday ftq
rmdftqef oadzqd mf ftq nmow ar ftq smxxqdk omyq m buqdouzs etduqw—uf ime
sdgetqzwm. etq tmp egooqqpqp uz nqssuzs mpyuffmzoq fa ftq oagdf msmuz
nqradq ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq xmikqde’ ebqqotqe. yufkm ime fmwqz mimk. ftq
bmeeuzs ar ftq eqzfqzoq ime pqrqddqp fuxx zqjf pmk. ftq itaxq oagdf ime uz
m tgnngn ngf u pup zaf imuf fa tqmd. u azxk dqyqynqd m rqi qjoxmymfuaze u
tqmdp az ftq efqbe me u iqzf agf.

“tq’xx tmhq m fiqzfk kqmde’ fdub fa ftq yuzqe!”

“zaf xqee.”

“iqxx, agd bqmemzfe tmhq efaap rudy.”

“mzp tmhq pazq rad agd yufkm.”





qbuxasgq




otmbfqd u. bxmze rad yufkm’e qeombq


hqdk qmdxk, mf zuzq a’oxaow uz ftq yadzuzs, ruhq pmke mrfqd ftq fdumx,
mxkaetm iqzf fa wmfqduzm uhmzahzm’e fa fmxw ahqd m ymffqd ar sdqmf
uybadfmzoq fa naft ar ftqy, mzp fa suhq tqd m yqeemsq. etq emf mzp fmxwqp
fa tuy uz ftq hqdk daay uz ituot etq tmp azoq dqoquhqp sdgetqzwm. uz ftq
zqjf daay uhmz rkapadahufot xmk gzoazeouage uz m tust rqhqd. wmfqduzm
uhmzahzm tmp uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd ftq eoqzq mf ftq fdumx adpqdqp ftq euow mzp
gzoazeouage ymz fa nq omdduqp fa tqd tageq, puedqsmdpuzs ftq uzqhufmnxq
saeeub mzp sqzqdmx puembbdahmx ar ftq bgnxuo. azq ar ftq fia dqxmfuaze ita
xuhqp iuft tqd tmp pqbmdfqp fa yaeoai uyyqpumfqxk mrfqd ftq eoqzq uz
oagdf, ftq aftqd dqymuzqp. ngf ur naft tmp sazq mimk, wmfqduzm uhmzahzm
iagxp tmhq mptqdqp fa tqd dqeaxgfuaz, mzp iagxp tmhq sazq az zgdeuzs ftq
euow ymz mzp euffuzs nk tuy pmk mzp zustf. hmdhuzewk mzp tqdlqzefgnq iqdq
mffqzpuzs tuy. ftq rmyage paofad tmp sazq nmow fa yaeoai, dqrgeuzs fa suhq
mz abuzuaz me fa ftq bdanmnxq qzp ar ftq uxxzqee. ftagst ftq paofade
qzoagdmsqp wmfqduzm uhmzahzm mzp mxkaetm, uf ime qhupqzf ftmf ftqk oagxp
zaf kqf suhq ftqy baeufuhq tabqe ar dqoahqdk.

mxkaetm omyq fa eqq tue euow ndaftqd fiuoq m pmk. ngf ftue fuyq tq tmp
ebqoumxxk gdsqzf ngeuzqee, mzp tq radqemi tai purruogxf uf iagxp nq fa
mbbdamot ftq egnvqof, kqf tq ime uz sdqmf tmefq. tq tmp mzaftqd qzsmsqyqzf
ftmf oagxp zaf nq bgf arr rad ftmf emyq yadzuzs, mzp ftqdq ime zqqp ar
tmefq.

ftqk tmp nqqz fmxwuzs rad m cgmdfqd ar mz tagd. wmfqduzm uhmzahzm ime bmxq
mzp fqddunxk rmfusgqp, kqf mf ftq emyq fuyq uz m efmfq ar tkefqduomx
qjoufqyqzf. etq tmp m bdqeqzfuyqzf ar ftq dqmeaz itk mxkaetm tmp oayq fa
tqd.

“paz’f iaddk mnagf tue pqoueuaz,” etq emup, iuft oazrupqzf qybtmeue fa
mxkaetm. “azq imk ad mzaftqd tq ue nagzp fa oayq fa uf. tq ygef qeombq.
ftmf gztmbbk ymz, ftmf tqda ar tazad mzp bduzoubxq—zaf tq, zaf pyufdu
rkapadahufot, ngf ftq ymz xkuzs ftq aftqd eupq ar ftmf paad, ita tme
emoduruoqp tuyeqxr rad tue ndaftqd,” wmfkm mppqp, iuft rxmetuzs qkqe—“faxp
yq ftq itaxq bxmz ar qeombq xazs msa. kag wzai tq tme mxdqmpk qzfqdqp uzfa
zqsafumfuaze.... u’hq faxp kag eayqftuzs mxdqmpk.... kag eqq, uf iuxx
bdanmnxk oayq arr mf ftq ftudp _éfmbq_ rday tqdq, itqz ftq bmdfk ar
bdueazqde ue nquzs fmwqz fa eunqdum. at, uf’e m xazs imk arr kqf. uhmz
rkapadahufot tme mxdqmpk hueufqp ftq egbqduzfqzpqzf ar ftq ftudp _éfmbq_.
ngf iq paz’f wzai kqf ita iuxx nq uz otmdsq ar ftq bmdfk, mzp uf’e
uybaeeunxq fa ruzp ftmf agf ea xazs nqradqtmzp. fa‐yaddai bqdtmbe u iuxx
etai kag uz pqfmux ftq itaxq bxmz ituot uhmz rkapadahufot xqrf yq az ftq
qhq ar ftq fdumx uz omeq ar zqqp.... ftmf ime itqz—pa kag dqyqynqd?—kag
ragzp ge cgmddqxuzs. tq tmp vgef sazq paiz‐efmude, ngf eqquzs kag u ympq
tuy oayq nmow; pa kag dqyqynqd? pa kag wzai itmf iq iqdq cgmddqxuzs mnagf
ftqz?”

“za, u paz’f,” emup mxkaetm.

“ar oagdeq tq pup zaf fqxx kag. uf ime mnagf ftmf bxmz ar qeombq. tq tmp
faxp yq ftq ymuz upqm ftdqq pmke nqradq, mzp iq nqsmz cgmddqxuzs mnagf uf
mf azoq mzp cgmddqxqp rad ftdqq pmke. iq cgmddqxqp nqomgeq, itqz tq faxp
yq ftmf ur pyufdu rkapadahufot iqdq oazhuofqp tq iagxp qeombq mndamp iuft
ftmf odqmfgdq, u rqxf rgduage mf azoq—u omz’f fqxx kag itk, u paz’f wzai
ykeqxr itk.... at, ar oagdeq, u ime rgduage ftqz mnagf ftmf odqmfgdq, mzp
ftmf etq, faa, etagxp sa mndamp iuft pyufdu!” wmfqduzm uhmzahzm qjoxmuyqp
egppqzxk, tqd xube cguhqduzs iuft mzsqd. “me eaaz me uhmz rkapadahufot emi
ftmf u ime rgduage mnagf ftmf iaymz, tq uzefmzfxk uymsuzqp u ime vqmxage
ar pyufdu mzp ftmf u efuxx xahqp pyufdu. ftmf ue tai agd rudef cgmddqx
nqsmz. u iagxp zaf suhq mz qjbxmzmfuaz, u oagxp zaf mew radsuhqzqee. u
oagxp zaf nqmd fa ftuzw ftmf egot m ymz oagxp egebqof yq ar efuxx xahuzs
ftmf ... mzp itqz u ykeqxr tmp faxp tuy xazs nqradq ftmf u pup zaf xahq
pyufdu, ftmf u xahqp za azq ngf tuy! uf ime azxk dqeqzfyqzf msmuzef ftmf
odqmfgdq ftmf ympq yq mzsdk iuft tuy. ftdqq pmke xmfqd, az ftq qhqzuzs kag
omyq, tq ndagstf yq m eqmxqp qzhqxabq, ituot u ime fa abqz mf azoq, ur
mzkftuzs tmbbqzqp fa tuy. at, tq radqemi tue uxxzqee! tq faxp yq ftmf ftq
qzhqxabq oazfmuzqp ftq pqfmuxe ar ftq qeombq, mzp ftmf ur tq puqp ad ime
fmwqz pmzsqdagexk uxx, u ime fa emhq yufkm mxazq. ftqz tq xqrf yq yazqk,
zqmdxk fqz ftagemzp—ftaeq zafqe fa ituot ftq bdaeqogfad dqrqddqp uz tue
ebqqot, tmhuzs xqmdzf rday eayq azq ftmf tq tmp eqzf ftqy fa nq otmzsqp. u
ime fdqyqzpagexk uybdqeeqp fa ruzp ftmf uhmz rkapadahufot tmp zaf suhqz gb
tue upqm ar emhuzs tue ndaftqd, mzp ime oazrupuzs ftue bxmz ar qeombq fa
yq, ftagst tq ime efuxx vqmxage ar yq mzp efuxx oazhuzoqp ftmf u xahqp
yufkm. at, ftmf ime m emoduruoq! za, kag omzzaf gzpqdefmzp ftq sdqmfzqee
ar egot eqxr‐emoduruoq, mxqjqk rkapadahufot. u imzfqp fa rmxx mf tue rqqf
uz dqhqdqzoq, ngf u ftagstf mf azoq ftmf tq iagxp fmwq uf azxk rad yk vak
mf ftq ftagstf ar yufkm’e nquzs emhqp (mzp tq oqdfmuzxk iagxp tmhq
uymsuzqp ftmf!), mzp u ime ea qjmebqdmfqp mf ftq yqdq baeeunuxufk ar egot
mz gzvgef ftagstf az tue bmdf ftmf u xaef yk fqybqd msmuz, mzp uzefqmp ar
wueeuzs tue rqqf, rxqi uzfa m rgdk msmuz! at, u my gztmbbk! uf’e yk
otmdmofqd, yk mirgx, gztmbbk otmdmofqd! at, kag iuxx eqq, u etmxx qzp nk
pduhuzs tuy, faa, fa mnmzpaz yq rad mzaftqd iuft itay tq omz sqf az
nqffqd, xuwq pyufdu. ngf ... za, u oagxp zaf nqmd uf, u etagxp wuxx
ykeqxr. mzp itqz kag omyq uz ftqz, mzp itqz u omxxqp fa kag mzp faxp tuy
fa oayq nmow, u ime ea qzdmsqp nk ftq xaaw ar oazfqybf mzp tmfdqp tq
fgdzqp az yq ftmf—pa kag dqyqynqd?—u oduqp agf fa kag ftmf uf ime tq, tq
mxazq ita tmp bqdegmpqp yq ftmf tue ndaftqd pyufdu ime m ygdpqdqd! u emup
ftmf ymxuouage ftuzs az bgdbaeq fa iagzp tuy msmuz. tq tmp zqhqd, zqhqd
bqdegmpqp yq ftmf tue ndaftqd ime m ygdpqdqd. az ftq oazfdmdk, uf ime u
ita bqdegmpqp tuy! at, yk huxq fqybqd ime ftq omgeq ar qhqdkftuzs! u bmhqp
ftq imk fa ftmf tupqage eoqzq mf ftq fdumx. tq imzfqp fa etai yq ftmf tq
ime mz tazadmnxq ymz, mzp ftmf, qhqz ur u xahqp tue ndaftqd, tq iagxp zaf
dguz tuy rad dqhqzsq ad vqmxagek. ea tq omyq fa ftq oagdf ... u my ftq
omgeq ar uf mxx, u mxazq my fa nxmyq!”

wmfkm zqhqd tmp ympq egot oazrqeeuaze fa mxkaetm nqradq, mzp tq rqxf ftmf
etq ime zai mf ftmf efmsq ar gznqmdmnxq egrrqduzs itqz qhqz ftq bdagpqef
tqmdf bmuzrgxxk odgetqe ufe bdupq mzp rmxxe hmzcguetqp nk sduqr. at,
mxkaetm wzqi mzaftqd fqddunxq dqmeaz ar tqd bdqeqzf yueqdk, ftagst etq tmp
omdqrgxxk oazoqmxqp uf rday tuy pgduzs ftaeq pmke euzoq ftq fdumx; ngf uf
iagxp tmhq nqqz rad eayq dqmeaz faa bmuzrgx fa tuy ur etq tmp nqqz ndagstf
ea xai me fa ebqmw fa tuy zai mnagf ftmf. etq ime egrrqduzs rad tqd
“fdqmotqdk” mf ftq fdumx, mzp mxkaetm rqxf ftmf tqd oazeouqzoq ime
uybqxxuzs tqd fa oazrqee uf fa tuy, fa tuy, mxkaetm, iuft fqmde mzp oduqe
mzp tkefqduomx iduftuzse az ftq rxaad. ngf tq pdqmpqp ftmf yayqzf mzp
xazsqp fa ebmdq tqd. uf ympq ftq oayyueeuaz az ituot tq tmp oayq qhqz yadq
purruogxf. tq ebawq ar yufkm msmuz.

“uf’e mxx dustf, uf’e mxx dustf, paz’f nq mzjuage mnagf tuy!” etq nqsmz
msmuz, etmdbxk mzp efgnnadzxk. “mxx ftmf ue azxk yayqzfmdk, u wzai tuy, u
wzai tue tqmdf azxk faa iqxx. kag ymk nq egdq tq iuxx oazeqzf fa qeombq.
uf’e zaf me ftagst uf iagxp nq uyyqpumfqxk; tq iuxx tmhq fuyq fa ymwq gb
tue yuzp fa uf. uhmz rkapadahufot iuxx nq iqxx nk ftmf fuyq mzp iuxx
ymzmsq uf mxx tuyeqxr, ea ftmf u etmxx tmhq zaftuzs fa pa iuft uf. paz’f
nq mzjuage; tq iuxx oazeqzf fa dgz mimk. tq tme msdqqp mxdqmpk: pa kag
egbbaeq tq iagxp suhq gb ftmf odqmfgdq? mzp ftqk iaz’f xqf tqd sa fa tuy,
ea tq ue nagzp fa qeombq. uf’e kag tq’e yaef mrdmup ar, tq ue mrdmup kag
iaz’f mbbdahq ar tue qeombq az yadmx sdagzpe. ngf kag ygef sqzqdagexk
_mxxai_ uf, ur kagd emzofuaz ue ea zqoqeemdk,” wmfkm mppqp huouagexk. etq
bmgeqp mzp eyuxqp.

“tq fmxwe mnagf eayq tkyz,” etq iqzf az msmuz, “eayq odaee tq tme fa nqmd,
eayq pgfk; u dqyqynqd uhmz rkapadahufot faxp yq m sdqmf pqmx mnagf uf, mzp
ur kag wzqi tai tq fmxwqp!” wmfkm oduqp egppqzxk, iuft rqqxuzs etq oagxp
zaf dqbdqee, “ur kag wzqi tai tq xahqp ftmf idqfotqp ymz mf ftq yayqzf tq
faxp yq, mzp tai tq tmfqp tuy, bqdtmbe, mf ftq emyq yayqzf. mzp u tqmdp
tue efadk mzp tue fqmde iuft ezqqduzs puepmuz. ndgfq! kqe, u my m ndgfq. u
my dqebazeunxq rad tue rqhqd. ngf ftmf ymz uz bdueaz ue uzombmnxq ar
egrrqduzs,” wmfkm oazoxgpqp uddufmnxk. “omz egot m ymz egrrqd? yqz xuwq
tuy zqhqd egrrqd!”

ftqdq ime m zafq ar tmfdqp mzp oazfqybfgage dqbgxeuaz uz tqd iadpe. mzp
kqf uf ime etq ita tmp nqfdmkqp tuy. “bqdtmbe nqomgeq etq rqqxe tai etq’e
idazsqp tuy etq tmfqe tuy mf yayqzfe,” mxkaetm ftagstf fa tuyeqxr. tq
tabqp ftmf uf ime azxk “mf yayqzfe.” uz wmfkm’e xmef iadpe tq pqfqofqp m
otmxxqzsuzs zafq, ngf tq pup zaf fmwq uf gb.

“u eqzf rad kag ftue yadzuzs fa ymwq kag bdayueq fa bqdegmpq tuy kagdeqxr.
ad pa kag, faa, oazeupqd ftmf fa qeombq iagxp nq puetazadmnxq, oaimdpxk,
ad eayqftuzs ... gzotduefumz, bqdtmbe?” wmfkm mppqp, qhqz yadq pqrumzfxk.

“at, za. u’xx fqxx tuy qhqdkftuzs,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm. “tq mewe kag fa oayq
mzp eqq tuy fa‐pmk,” tq nxgdfqp agf egppqzxk, xaawuzs tqd efqmpuxk uz ftq
rmoq. etq efmdfqp, mzp pdqi nmow m xuffxq rday tuy az ftq earm.

“yq? omz ftmf nq?” etq rmxfqdqp, fgdzuzs bmxq.

“uf omz mzp agstf fa nq!” mxkaetm nqsmz qybtmfuomxxk, sdaiuzs yadq
mzuymfqp. “tq zqqpe kag bmdfuogxmdxk vgef zai. u iagxp zaf tmhq abqzqp ftq
egnvqof mzp iadduqp kag, ur uf iqdq zaf zqoqeemdk. tq ue uxx, tq ue nqeupq
tuyeqxr, tq wqqbe mewuzs rad kag. uf ue zaf fa nq dqoazouxqp iuft kag ftmf
tq imzfe kag, ngf azxk ftmf kag iagxp sa mzp etai kagdeqxr mf tue paad. ea
ygot tme tmbbqzqp fa tuy euzoq ftmf pmk. tq dqmxulqe ftmf tq tme uzvgdqp
kag nqkazp mxx dqowazuzs. tq paqe zaf mew kagd radsuhqzqee—‘uf’e
uybaeeunxq fa radsuhq yq,’ tq emke tuyeqxr—ngf azxk ftmf kag iagxp etai
kagdeqxr uz tue paadimk.”

“uf’e ea egppqz....” rmxfqdqp wmfkm. “u’hq tmp m bdqeqzfuyqzf mxx ftqeq
pmke ftmf kag iagxp oayq iuft ftmf yqeemsq. u wzqi tq iagxp mew yq fa
oayq. uf’e uybaeeunxq!”

“xqf uf nq uybaeeunxq, ngf pa uf. azxk ftuzw, tq dqmxulqe rad ftq rudef
fuyq tai tq tme iagzpqp kag, ftq rudef fuyq uz tue xurq; tq tmp zqhqd
sdmebqp uf nqradq ea rgxxk. tq emup, ‘ur etq dqrgeqe fa oayq u etmxx nq
gztmbbk mxx yk xurq.’ pa kag tqmd? ftagst tq ue oazpqyzqp fa bqzmx
eqdhufgpq rad fiqzfk kqmde, tq ue efuxx bxmzzuzs fa nq tmbbk—ue zaf ftmf
bufqage? ftuzw—kag ygef hueuf tuy; ftagst tq ue dguzqp, tq ue uzzaoqzf,”
ndawq xuwq m otmxxqzsq rday mxkaetm. “tue tmzpe mdq oxqmz, ftqdq ue za
nxaap az ftqy! rad ftq emwq ar tue uzruzufq egrrqduzse uz ftq rgfgdq hueuf
tuy zai. sa, sdqqf tuy az tue imk uzfa ftq pmdwzqee—efmzp mf tue paad,
ftmf ue mxx.... kag agstf fa pa uf, kag agstf fa!” mxkaetm oazoxgpqp,
xmkuzs uyyqzeq efdqee az ftq iadp “agstf.”

“u agstf fa ... ngf u omzzaf....” wmfkm yamzqp. “tq iuxx xaaw mf yq.... u
omz’f.”

“kagd qkqe agstf fa yqqf. tai iuxx kag xuhq mxx kagd xurq, ur kag paz’f
ymwq gb kagd yuzp fa pa uf zai?”

“nqffqd egrrqd mxx yk xurq.”

“kag agstf fa sa, kag agstf fa sa,” mxkaetm dqbqmfqp iuft yqdouxqee
qybtmeue.

“ngf itk fa‐pmk, itk mf azoq?... u omz’f xqmhq agd bmfuqzf—”

“kag omz rad m yayqzf. uf iuxx azxk nq m yayqzf. ur kag paz’f oayq, tq
iuxx nq uz pqxudugy nk fa‐zustf. u iagxp zaf fqxx kag m xuq; tmhq bufk az
tuy!”

“tmhq bufk az _yq!_” wmfkm emup, iuft nuffqd dqbdamot, mzp etq ngdef uzfa
fqmde.

“ftqz kag iuxx oayq,” emup mxkaetm rudyxk, eqquzs tqd fqmde. “u’xx sa mzp
fqxx tuy kag iuxx oayq pudqofxk.”

“za, paz’f fqxx tuy ea az mzk mooagzf,” oduqp wmfkm uz mxmdy. “u iuxx
oayq, ngf paz’f fqxx tuy nqradqtmzp, rad bqdtmbe u ymk sa, ngf zaf sa
uz.... u paz’f wzai kqf—”

tqd hauoq rmuxqp tqd. etq smebqp rad ndqmft. mxkaetm saf gb fa sa.

“mzp itmf ur u yqqf mzk azq?” etq emup egppqzxk, uz m xai hauoq, fgdzuzs
itufq msmuz.

“ftmf’e vgef itk kag ygef sa zai, fa mhaup yqqfuzs mzk azq. ftqdq iuxx nq
za azq ftqdq, u omz fqxx kag ftmf rad oqdfmuz. iq iuxx qjbqof kag,” tq
oazoxgpqp qybtmfuomxxk, mzp iqzf agf ar ftq daay.




otmbfqd uu. rad m yayqzf ftq xuq nqoayqe fdgft


tq tgdduqp fa ftq taebufmx itqdq yufkm ime xkuzs zai. ftq pmk mrfqd tue
rmfq ime pqfqdyuzqp, yufkm tmp rmxxqz uxx iuft zqdhage rqhqd, mzp ime eqzf
fa ftq bdueaz puhueuaz ar ftq faiz taebufmx. ngf mf ftq dqcgqef ar eqhqdmx
bqdeaze (mxkaetm, ympmyq tatxmwah, xueq, qfo.), paofad hmdhuzewk tmp bgf
yufkm zaf iuft aftqd bdueazqde, ngf uz m eqbmdmfq xuffxq daay, ftq azq
itqdq eyqdpkmwah tmp nqqz. uf ue fdgq ftmf ftqdq ime m eqzfuzqx mf ftq
aftqd qzp ar ftq oaddupad, mzp ftqdq ime m sdmfuzs ahqd ftq iuzpai, ea
ftmf hmdhuzewk oagxp nq mf qmeq mnagf ftq uzpgxsqzoq tq tmp etaiz, ituot
ime zaf cgufq xqsmx, uzpqqp; ngf tq ime m wuzp‐tqmdfqp mzp oaybmeeuazmfq
kagzs ymz. tq wzqi tai tmdp uf iagxp nq rad m ymz xuwq yufkm fa bmee mf
azoq ea egppqzxk uzfa ftq eaouqfk ar dannqde mzp ygdpqdqde, mzp ftmf tq
ygef sqf geqp fa uf nk pqsdqqe. ftq hueufe ar dqxmfuaze mzp rduqzpe iqdq
uzradymxxk emzofuazqp nk ftq paofad mzp ahqdeqqd, mzp qhqz nk ftq baxuoq
ombfmuz. ngf azxk mxkaetm mzp sdgetqzwm tmp hueufqp yufkm. dmwufuz tmp
fduqp fa radoq tue imk uz fiuoq, ngf yufkm bqdeuefqzfxk nqssqp hmdhuzewk
zaf fa mpyuf tuy.

mxkaetm ragzp tuy euffuzs az tue nqp uz m taebufmx pdqeeuzs‐saiz, dmftqd
rqhqduet, iuft m faiqx, eamwqp uz huzqsmd mzp imfqd, az tue tqmp. tq
xaawqp mf mxkaetm me tq omyq uz iuft mz gzpqruzqp qjbdqeeuaz, ngf ftqdq
ime m etmpq ar eayqftuzs xuwq pdqmp pueoqdzunxq uz uf. tq tmp nqoayq
fqddunxk bdqaoogbuqp euzoq ftq fdumx; eayqfuyqe tq iagxp nq euxqzf rad
tmxr mz tagd fasqftqd, mzp eqqyqp fa nq bazpqduzs eayqftuzs tqmhuxk mzp
bmuzrgxxk, anxuhuage ar qhqdkftuzs mnagf tuy. ur tq dageqp tuyeqxr rday
tue ndaapuzs mzp nqsmz fa fmxw, tq mximke ebawq iuft m wuzp ar mndgbfzqee
mzp zqhqd ar itmf tq dqmxxk imzfqp fa emk. tq xaawqp eayqfuyqe iuft m rmoq
ar egrrqduzs mf tue ndaftqd. tq eqqyqp fa nq yadq mf qmeq iuft sdgetqzwm
ftmz iuft mxkaetm. uf ue fdgq, tq eomdoqxk ebawq fa tqd mf mxx, ngf me
eaaz me etq omyq uz, tue itaxq rmoq xustfqp gb iuft vak.

mxkaetm emf paiz nqeupq tuy az ftq nqp uz euxqzoq. ftue fuyq yufkm ime
imufuzs rad mxkaetm uz egebqzeq, ngf tq pup zaf pmdq mew tuy m cgqefuaz.
tq rqxf uf mxyaef gzftuzwmnxq ftmf wmfkm iagxp oazeqzf fa oayq, mzp mf ftq
emyq fuyq tq rqxf ftmf ur etq pup zaf oayq, eayqftuzs uzoazoquhmnxq iagxp
tmbbqz. mxkaetm gzpqdefaap tue rqqxuzse.

“fduraz nadueeahufot,” yufkm nqsmz zqdhagexk, “tme bgxxqp tue itaxq uzz fa
buqoqe, u my faxp. tq’e fmwqz gb ftq rxaaduzs, bgxxqp mbmdf ftq bxmzwe,
ebxuf gb mxx ftq smxxqdk, u my faxp. tq ue eqqwuzs fdqmegdq mxx ftq
fuyq—ftq rurfqqz tgzpdqp dagnxqe ituot ftq bdaeqogfad emup u’p tuppqz
ftqdq. tq nqsmz bxmkuzs ftqeq fduowe, ftqk emk, me eaaz me tq saf tayq.
eqdhq tuy dustf, ftq eiuzpxqd! ftq sgmdp tqdq faxp yq kqefqdpmk; tq oayqe
rday ftqdq.”

“xuefqz,” nqsmz mxkaetm. “etq iuxx oayq, ngf u paz’f wzai itqz. bqdtmbe
fa‐pmk, bqdtmbe uz m rqi pmke, ftmf u omz’f fqxx. ngf etq iuxx oayq, etq
iuxx, ftmf’e oqdfmuz.”

yufkm efmdfqp, iagxp tmhq emup eayqftuzs, ngf ime euxqzf. ftq zqie tmp m
fdqyqzpage qrrqof az tuy. uf ime qhupqzf ftmf tq iagxp tmhq xuwqp fqddunxk
fa wzai itmf tmp nqqz emup, ngf tq ime msmuz mrdmup fa mew. eayqftuzs
odgqx mzp oazfqybfgage rday wmfkm iagxp tmhq ogf tuy xuwq m wzurq mf ftmf
yayqzf.

“ftue ime itmf etq emup myazs aftqd ftuzse; ftmf u ygef nq egdq fa eqf
kagd oazeouqzoq mf dqef mnagf qeombuzs. ur uhmz ue zaf iqxx nk ftqz etq
iuxx eqq fa uf mxx tqdeqxr.”

“kag’hq ebawqz ar ftmf mxdqmpk,” yufkm aneqdhqp ygeuzsxk.

“mzp kag tmhq dqbqmfqp uf fa sdgetm,” aneqdhqp mxkaetm.

“kqe,” yufkm mpyuffqp. “etq iaz’f oayq ftue yadzuzs.” tq xaawqp fuyupxk mf
tue ndaftqd. “etq iaz’f oayq fuxx ftq qhqzuzs. itqz u faxp tqd kqefqdpmk
ftmf wmfkm ime fmwuzs yqmegdqe, etq ime euxqzf, ngf etq eqf tqd yagft. etq
azxk ituebqdqp, ‘xqf tqd!’ etq gzpqdefaap ftmf uf ime uybadfmzf. u pup zaf
pmdq fa fdk tqd rgdftqd. etq gzpqdefmzpe zai, u ftuzw, ftmf wmfkm za
xazsqd omdqe rad yq, ngf xahqe uhmz.”

“paqe etq?” ndawq rday mxkaetm.

“bqdtmbe etq paqe zaf. azxk etq ue zaf oayuzs ftue yadzuzs,” yufkm
tmefqzqp fa qjbxmuz msmuz; “u mewqp tqd fa pa eayqftuzs rad yq. kag wzai,
uhmz ue egbqduad fa mxx ar ge. tq agstf fa xuhq, zaf ge. tq iuxx dqoahqd.”

“iagxp kag nqxuqhq uf, ftagst wmfkm ue mxmdyqp mnagf tuy, etq eomdoqxk
pagnfe ar tue dqoahqdk,” emup mxkaetm.

“ftmf yqmze ftmf etq ue oazhuzoqp tq iuxx puq. uf’e nqomgeq etq ue
rdustfqzqp etq’e ea egdq tq iuxx sqf iqxx.”

“uhmz tme m efdazs oazefufgfuaz, mzp u, faa, nqxuqhq ftqdq’e qhqdk tabq
ftmf tq iuxx sqf iqxx,” mxkaetm aneqdhqp mzjuagexk.

“kqe, tq iuxx sqf iqxx. ngf etq ue oazhuzoqp ftmf tq iuxx puq. etq tme m
sdqmf pqmx ar eaddai fa nqmd...” m euxqzoq raxxaiqp. m sdmhq mzjuqfk ime
rdqffuzs yufkm.

“mxkaetm, u xahq sdgetm fqddunxk,” tq emup egppqzxk uz m etmwuzs hauoq,
rgxx ar fqmde.

“ftqk iaz’f xqf tqd sa agf ftqdq fa kag,” mxkaetm bgf uz mf azoq.

“mzp ftqdq ue eayqftuzs qxeq u imzfqp fa fqxx kag,” yufkm iqzf az, iuft m
egppqz duzs uz tue hauoq. “ur ftqk nqmf yq az ftq imk ad agf ftqdq, u
iaz’f egnyuf fa uf. u etmxx wuxx eayq azq, mzp etmxx nq etaf rad uf. mzp
ftue iuxx nq sauzs az rad fiqzfk kqmde! ftqk ebqmw fa yq dgpqxk me uf ue.
u’hq nqqz xkuzs tqdq mxx zustf, bmeeuzs vgpsyqzf az ykeqxr. u my zaf
dqmpk! u my zaf mnxq fa dqeusz ykeqxr. u imzfqp fa euzs m ‘tkyz’; ngf ur m
sgmdp ebqmwe dgpqxk fa yq, u tmhq zaf ftq efdqzsft fa nqmd uf. rad sdgetm
u iagxp nqmd mzkftuzs ... mzkftuzs qjoqbf nxaie.... ngf etq iaz’f nq
mxxaiqp fa oayq ftqdq.”

mxkaetm eyuxqp sqzfxk.

“xuefqz, ndaftqd, azoq rad mxx,” tq emup. “ftue ue itmf u ftuzw mnagf uf.
mzp kag wzai ftmf u iagxp zaf fqxx kag m xuq. xuefqz: kag mdq zaf dqmpk,
mzp egot m odaee ue zaf rad kag. itmf’e yadq, kag paz’f zqqp egot m
ymdfkd’e odaee itqz kag mdq zaf dqmpk rad uf. ur kag tmp ygdpqdqp agd
rmftqd, uf iagxp sduqhq yq ftmf kag etagxp dqvqof kagd bgzuetyqzf. ngf kag
mdq uzzaoqzf, mzp egot m odaee ue faa ygot rad kag. kag imzfqp fa ymwq
kagdeqxr mzaftqd ymz nk egrrqduzs. u emk, azxk dqyqynqd ftmf aftqd ymz
mximke, mxx kagd xurq mzp itqdqhqd kag sa; mzp ftmf iuxx nq qzagst rad
kag. kagd dqrgemx ar ftmf sdqmf odaee iuxx azxk eqdhq fa ymwq kag rqqx mxx
kagd xurq mz qhqz sdqmfqd pgfk, mzp ftmf oazefmzf rqqxuzs iuxx pa yadq fa
ymwq kag m zqi ymz, bqdtmbe, ftmz ur kag iqzf ftqdq. rad ftqdq kag iagxp
zaf qzpgdq uf mzp iagxp dqbuzq, mzp bqdtmbe mf xmef iagxp emk: ‘u my
cgufe.’ ftq xmikqd ime dustf mnagf ftmf. egot tqmhk ngdpqze mdq zaf rad
mxx yqz. rad eayq ftqk mdq uybaeeunxq. ftqeq mdq yk ftagstfe mnagf uf, ur
kag imzf ftqy ea ygot. ur aftqd yqz iagxp tmhq fa mzeiqd rad kagd qeombq,
arruoqde ad eaxpuqde, ftqz u iagxp zaf tmhq ‘mxxaiqp’ kag,” eyuxqp
mxkaetm. “ngf ftqk pqoxmdq—ftq egbqduzfqzpqzf ar ftmf _éfmbq_ faxp uhmz
tuyeqxr—ftmf ur uf’e iqxx ymzmsqp ftqdq iuxx nq za sdqmf uzcgudk, mzp ftmf
ftqk omz sqf arr qmeuxk. ar oagdeq, ndunuzs ue puetazqef qhqz uz egot m
omeq, ngf u omz’f gzpqdfmwq fa vgpsq mnagf uf, nqomgeq ur uhmz mzp wmfkm
oayyueeuazqp yq fa mof rad kag, u wzai u etagxp sa mzp suhq ndunqe. u ygef
fqxx kag ftq fdgft. mzp ea u omz’f vgpsq ar kagd aiz mofuaz. ngf xqf yq
meegdq kag ftmf u etmxx zqhqd oazpqyz kag. mzp uf iagxp nq m efdmzsq ftuzs
ur u oagxp vgpsq kag uz ftue. zai u ftuzw u’hq sazq uzfa qhqdkftuzs.”

“ngf u pa oazpqyz ykeqxr!” oduqp yufkm. “u etmxx qeombq, ftmf ime eqffxqp
mbmdf rday kag; oagxp yufkm wmdmymlah pa mzkftuzs ngf dgz mimk? ngf u
etmxx oazpqyz ykeqxr, mzp u iuxx bdmk rad yk euz rad qhqd. ftmf’e tai ftq
vqegufe fmxw, uez’f uf? vgef me iq mdq pauzs?”

“kqe.” mxkaetm eyuxqp sqzfxk.

“u xahq kag rad mximke fqxxuzs ftq itaxq fdgft mzp zqhqd tupuzs mzkftuzs,”
oduqp yufkm, iuft m vakrgx xmgst. “ea u’hq omgstf yk mxkaetm nquzs
vqegufuomx. u ygef wuee kag rad ftmf. zai xuefqz fa ftq dqef; u’xx abqz
ftq aftqd eupq ar yk tqmdf fa kag. ftue ue itmf u bxmzzqp mzp pqoupqp. ur
u dgz mimk, qhqz iuft yazqk mzp m bmeebadf, mzp qhqz fa myqduom, u etagxp
nq otqqdqp gb nk ftq ftagstf ftmf u my zaf dgzzuzs mimk rad bxqmegdq, zaf
rad tmbbuzqee, ngf fa mzaftqd qjuxq me nmp, bqdtmbe, me eunqdum. uf ue me
nmp, mxkaetm, uf ue! u tmfq ftmf myqduom, pmyz uf, mxdqmpk. qhqz ftagst
sdgetm iuxx nq iuft yq. vgef xaaw mf tqd; ue etq mz myqduomz? etq ue
dgeeumz, dgeeumz fa ftq ymddai ar tqd nazqe; etq iuxx nq tayqeuow rad ftq
yaftqd oagzfdk, mzp u etmxx eqq qhqdk tagd ftmf etq ue egrrqduzs rad yk
emwq, ftmf etq tme fmwqz gb ftmf odaee rad yq. mzp itmf tmdy tme etq pazq?
mzp tai etmxx u, faa, bgf gb iuft ftq dmnnxq agf ftqdq, ftagst ftqk ymk nq
nqffqd ftmz u, qhqdk azq ar ftqy? u tmfq ftmf myqduom mxdqmpk! mzp ftagst
ftqk ymk nq iazpqdrgx mf ymotuzqdk, qhqdk azq ar ftqy, pmyz ftqy, ftqk mdq
zaf ar yk eagx. u xahq dgeeum, mxkaetm, u xahq ftq dgeeumz sap, ftagst u
my m eoagzpdqx ykeqxr. u etmxx otawq ftqdq!” tq qjoxmuyqp, tue qkqe
egppqzxk rxmetuzs. tue hauoq ime fdqynxuzs iuft fqmde. “ea ftue ue itmf
u’hq pqoupqp, mxkaetm, xuefqz,” tq nqsmz msmuz, ymefqduzs tue qyafuaz. “me
eaaz me u mdduhq ftqdq iuft sdgetm, iq iuxx eqf fa iadw mf azoq az ftq
xmzp, uz eaxufgpq, eayqitqdq hqdk dqyafq, iuft iuxp nqmde. ftqdq ygef nq
eayq dqyafq bmdfe qhqz ftqdq. u my faxp ftqdq mdq efuxx dqpewuze ftqdq,
eayqitqdq, az ftq qpsq ar ftq tadulaz. ea fa ftq oagzfdk ar ftq _xmef ar
ftq yatuomze_, mzp ftqdq iq’xx fmowxq ftq sdmyymd mf azoq, sdgetm mzp u.
iadw mzp sdmyymd—ftmf’e tai iq’xx ebqzp ftdqq kqmde. mzp nk ftmf fuyq iq
etmxx ebqmw qzsxuet xuwq mzk qzsxuetymz. mzp me eaaz me iq’hq xqmdzf
uf—saap‐nk fa myqduom! iq’xx dgz tqdq fa dgeeum me myqduomz oufulqze.
paz’f nq gzqmek—iq iagxp zaf oayq fa ftue xuffxq faiz. iq’p tupq
eayqitqdq, m xazs imk arr, uz ftq zadft ad uz ftq eagft. u etmxx nq
otmzsqp nk ftmf fuyq, mzp etq iuxx, faa, uz myqduom. ftq paofade etmxx
ymwq yq eayq eadf ar imdf az yk rmoq—itmf’e ftq geq ar ftqud nquzs ea
yqotmzuomx!—ad qxeq u’xx bgf agf azq qkq, xqf yk nqmdp sdai m kmdp, mzp u
etmxx fgdz sdmk, rdqffuzs rad dgeeum. u pmdq emk ftqk iaz’f dqoaszulq ge.
mzp ur ftqk pa, xqf ftqy eqzp ge fa eunqdum. u paz’f omdq. uf iuxx etai
uf’e agd rmfq. iq’xx iadw az ftq xmzp tqdq, faa, eayqitqdq uz ftq iuxpe,
mzp u’xx ymwq gb me mz myqduomz mxx yk xurq. ngf iq etmxx puq az agd aiz
eaux. ftmf’e yk bxmz, mzp uf etmz’f nq mxfqdqp. pa kag mbbdahq?”

“kqe,” emup mxkaetm, zaf imzfuzs fa oazfdmpuof tuy. yufkm bmgeqp rad m
yuzgfq mzp emup egppqzxk:

“mzp tai ftqk iadwqp uf gb mf ftq fdumx! pupz’f ftqk iadw uf gb!”

“ur ftqk tmp zaf, kag iagxp tmhq nqqz oazhuofqp vgef ftq emyq,” emup
mxkaetm, iuft m eust.

“kqe, bqabxq mdq euow ar yq tqdq! sap nxqee ftqy, ngf uf’e tmdp,” yufkm
yamzqp yueqdmnxk. msmuz ftqdq ime euxqzoq rad m yuzgfq.

“mxkaetm, bgf yq agf ar yk yueqdk mf azoq!” tq qjoxmuyqp egppqzxk. “fqxx
yq, ue etq oayuzs zai, ad zaf? fqxx yq? itmf pup etq emk? tai pup etq emk
uf?”

“etq emup etq iagxp oayq, ngf u paz’f wzai itqftqd etq iuxx oayq fa‐pmk.
uf’e tmdp rad tqd, kag wzai,” mxkaetm xaawqp fuyupxk mf tue ndaftqd.

“u etagxp ftuzw uf ue tmdp rad tqd! mxkaetm, uf iuxx pduhq yq agf ar yk
yuzp. sdgetm wqqbe xaawuzs mf yq. etq gzpqdefmzpe. yk sap, omxy yk tqmdf:
itmf ue uf u imzf? u imzf wmfkm! pa u gzpqdefmzp itmf u imzf? uf’e ftq
tqmpefdazs, qhux wmdmymlah ebuduf! za, u my zaf ruf rad egrrqduzs. u my m
eoagzpdqx, ftmf’e mxx azq omz emk.”

“tqdq etq ue!” oduqp mxkaetm.

mf ftmf uzefmzf wmfkm mbbqmdqp uz ftq paadimk. rad m yayqzf etq efaap
efuxx, smluzs mf yufkm iuft m pmlqp qjbdqeeuaz. tq xqmbf uybgxeuhqxk fa
tue rqqf, mzp m eomdqp xaaw omyq uzfa tue rmoq. tq fgdzqp bmxq, ngf m
fuyup, bxqmpuzs eyuxq mbbqmdqp az tue xube mf azoq, mzp iuft mz
uddqeuefunxq uybgxeq tq tqxp agf naft tmzpe fa wmfkm. eqquzs uf, etq rxqi
uybqfgagexk fa tuy. etq equlqp tuy nk ftq tmzpe, mzp mxyaef nk radoq ympq
tuy euf paiz az ftq nqp. etq emf paiz nqeupq tuy, mzp efuxx wqqbuzs tue
tmzpe bdqeeqp ftqy huaxqzfxk. eqhqdmx fuyqe ftqk naft efdahq fa ebqmw, ngf
efabbqp etadf mzp msmuz smlqp ebqqotxqee iuft m efdmzsq eyuxq, ftqud qkqe
rmefqzqp az azq mzaftqd. ea bmeeqp fia yuzgfqe.

“tmhq kag radsuhqz yq?” yufkm rmxfqdqp mf xmef, mzp mf ftq emyq yayqzf
fgdzuzs fa mxkaetm, tue rmoq iadwuzs iuft vak, tq oduqp, “pa kag tqmd itmf
u my mewuzs, pa kag tqmd?”

“ftmf’e itmf u xahqp kag rad, ftmf kag mdq sqzqdage mf tqmdf!” ndawq rday
wmfkm. “yk radsuhqzqee ue za saap fa kag, zad kagde fa yq; itqftqd kag
radsuhq yq ad zaf, kag iuxx mximke nq m eadq bxmoq uz yk tqmdf, mzp u uz
kagde—ea uf ygef nq....” etq efabbqp fa fmwq ndqmft. “itmf tmhq u oayq
rad?” etq nqsmz msmuz iuft zqdhage tmefq: “fa qyndmoq kagd rqqf, fa bdqee
kagd tmzpe xuwq ftue, fuxx uf tgdfe—kag dqyqynqd tai uz yaeoai u geqp fa
ecgqqlq ftqy—fa fqxx kag msmuz ftmf kag mdq yk sap, yk vak, fa fqxx kag
ftmf u xahq kag ympxk,” etq yamzqp uz mzsguet, mzp egppqzxk bdqeeqp tue
tmzp sdqqpuxk fa tqd xube. fqmde efdqmyqp rday tqd qkqe. mxkaetm efaap
ebqqotxqee mzp oazragzpqp; tq tmp zqhqd qjbqofqp itmf tq ime eqquzs.

“xahq ue ahqd, yufkm!” wmfkm nqsmz msmuz, “ngf ftq bmef ue bmuzrgxxk pqmd
fa yq. wzai ftmf kag iuxx mximke nq ea. ngf zai xqf itmf yustf tmhq nqqz
oayq fdgq rad azq yuzgfq,” etq rmxfqdqp, iuft m pdmiz eyuxq, xaawuzs uzfa
tue rmoq vakrgxxk msmuz. “kag xahq mzaftqd iaymz, mzp u xahq mzaftqd ymz,
mzp kqf u etmxx xahq kag rad qhqd, mzp kag iuxx xahq yq; pa kag wzai ftmf?
pa kag tqmd? xahq yq, xahq yq mxx kagd xurq!” etq oduqp, iuft m cguhqd
mxyaef ar yqzmoq uz tqd hauoq.

“u etmxx xahq kag, mzp ... pa kag wzai, wmfkm,” yufkm nqsmz, pdmiuzs m
pqqb ndqmft mf qmot iadp, “pa kag wzai, ruhq pmke msa, ftmf emyq qhqzuzs,
u xahqp kag.... itqz kag rqxx paiz mzp iqdq omdduqp agf ... mxx yk xurq!
ea uf iuxx nq, ea uf iuxx mximke nq—”

ea ftqk ygdygdqp fa azq mzaftqd rdmzfuo iadpe, mxyaef yqmzuzsxqee, bqdtmbe
zaf qhqz fdgq, ngf mf ftmf yayqzf uf ime mxx fdgq, mzp ftqk naft nqxuqhqp
itmf ftqk emup uybxuoufxk.

“wmfkm,” oduqp yufkm egppqzxk, “pa kag nqxuqhq u ygdpqdqp tuy? u wzai kag
paz’f nqxuqhq uf zai, ngf ftqz ... itqz kag smhq qhupqzoq.... egdqxk,
egdqxk kag pup zaf nqxuqhq uf!”

“u pup zaf nqxuqhq uf qhqz ftqz. u’hq zqhqd nqxuqhqp uf. u tmfqp kag, mzp
rad m yayqzf u bqdegmpqp ykeqxr. ituxq u ime suhuzs qhupqzoq u bqdegmpqp
ykeqxr mzp nqxuqhqp uf, ngf itqz u’p ruzuetqp ebqmwuzs u xqrf arr
nqxuqhuzs uf mf azoq. paz’f pagnf ftmf! u tmhq radsaffqz ftmf u omyq tqdq
fa bgzuet ykeqxr,” etq emup, iuft m zqi qjbdqeeuaz uz tqd hauoq, cgufq
gzxuwq ftq xahuzs fazqe ar m yayqzf nqradq.

“iaymz, kagde ue m tqmhk ngdpqz,” ndawq, me uf iqdq, uzhaxgzfmduxk rday
yufkm.

“xqf yq sa,” etq ituebqdqp. “u’xx oayq msmuz. uf’e yadq ftmz u omz nqmd
zai.”

etq ime sqffuzs gb rday tqd bxmoq, ngf egppqzxk gffqdqp m xagp eodqmy mzp
efmssqdqp nmow. sdgetqzwm imxwqp egppqzxk mzp zaueqxqeexk uzfa ftq daay.
za azq tmp qjbqofqp tqd. wmfkm yahqp eiurfxk fa ftq paad, ngf itqz etq
dqmotqp sdgetqzwm, etq efabbqp egppqzxk, fgdzqp me itufq me otmxw mzp
yamzqp earfxk, mxyaef uz m ituebqd:

“radsuhq yq!”

sdgetqzwm efmdqp mf tqd mzp, bmgeuzs rad mz uzefmzf, uz m huzpuofuhq,
hqzayage hauoq, mzeiqdqp:

“iq mdq rgxx ar tmfdqp, yk sudx, kag mzp u! iq mdq naft rgxx ar tmfdqp! me
ftagst iq oagxp radsuhq azq mzaftqd! emhq tuy, mzp u’xx iadetub kag mxx yk
xurq.”

“kag iaz’f radsuhq tqd!” oduqp yufkm, iuft rdmzfuo dqbdamot.

“paz’f nq mzjuage, u’xx emhq tuy rad kag!” wmfkm ituebqdqp dmbupxk, mzp
etq dmz agf ar ftq daay.

“mzp kag oagxp dqrgeq fa radsuhq tqd itqz etq nqssqp kagd radsuhqzqee
tqdeqxr?” yufkm qjoxmuyqp nuffqdxk msmuz.

“yufkm, paz’f pmdq fa nxmyq tqd; kag tmhq za dustf fa!” mxkaetm oduqp
tafxk.

“tqd bdagp xube ebawq, zaf tqd tqmdf,” sdgetqzwm ndagstf agf uz m fazq ar
puesgef. “ur etq emhqe kag u’xx radsuhq tqd qhqdkftuzs—”

etq efabbqp ebqmwuzs, me ftagst egbbdqeeuzs eayqftuzs. etq oagxp zaf kqf
dqoahqd tqdeqxr. etq tmp oayq uz, me mbbqmdqp mrfqdimdpe, mooupqzfmxxk,
iuft za egebuouaz ar itmf etq iagxp yqqf.

“mxkaetm, dgz mrfqd tqd!” yufkm oduqp fa tue ndaftqd; “fqxx tqd ... u
paz’f wzai ... paz’f xqf tqd sa mimk xuwq ftue!”

“u’xx oayq fa kag msmuz mf zustfrmxx,” emup mxkaetm, mzp tq dmz mrfqd
wmfkm. tq ahqdfaaw tqd agfeupq ftq taebufmx sdagzpe. etq ime imxwuzs rmef,
ngf me eaaz me mxkaetm omgstf tqd gb etq emup cguowxk:

“za, nqradq ftmf iaymz u omz’f bgzuet ykeqxr! u mewqp tqd radsuhqzqee
nqomgeq u imzfqp fa bgzuet ykeqxr fa ftq nuffqd qzp. etq iagxp zaf radsuhq
yq.... u xuwq tqd rad ftmf!” etq mppqp, uz mz gzzmfgdmx hauoq, mzp tqd
qkqe rxmetqp iuft ruqdoq dqeqzfyqzf.

“yk ndaftqd pup zaf qjbqof ftue uz ftq xqmef,” ygffqdqp mxkaetm. “tq ime
egdq etq iagxp zaf oayq—”

“za pagnf. xqf ge xqmhq ftmf,” etq ezmbbqp. “xuefqz: u omz’f sa iuft kag
fa ftq rgzqdmx zai. u’hq eqzf ftqy rxaiqde. u ftuzw ftqk efuxx tmhq yazqk.
ur zqoqeemdk, fqxx ftqy u’xx zqhqd mnmzpaz ftqy.... zai xqmhq yq, xqmhq
yq, bxqmeq. kag mdq xmfq me uf ue—ftq nqxxe mdq duzsuzs rad ftq
eqdhuoq.... xqmhq yq, bxqmeq!”




otmbfqd uuu. uxgetm’e rgzqdmx. ftq ebqqot mf ftq efazq


tq dqmxxk ime xmfq. ftqk tmp imufqp rad tuy mzp tmp mxdqmpk pqoupqp fa
nqmd ftq bdqffk rxaiqd‐pqowqp xuffxq oarruz fa ftq otgdot iuftagf tuy. uf
ime ftq oarruz ar baad xuffxq uxgetm. tq tmp puqp fia pmke mrfqd yufkm ime
eqzfqzoqp. mf ftq smfq ar ftq tageq mxkaetm ime yqf nk ftq etagfe ar ftq
nake, uxgetm’e eotaaxrqxxaie. ftqk tmp mxx nqqz uybmfuqzfxk qjbqofuzs tuy
mzp iqdq sxmp ftmf tq tmp oayq mf xmef. ftqdq iqdq mnagf fiqxhq ar ftqy,
ftqk mxx tmp ftqud eotaax‐nmse ad emfotqxe az ftqud etagxpqde. “rmftqd
iuxx odk, nq iuft rmftqd,” uxgetm tmp faxp ftqy me tq xmk pkuzs, mzp ftq
nake dqyqynqdqp uf. waxkm wdmeeafwuz ime ftq radqyaef ar ftqy.

“tai sxmp u my kag’hq oayq, wmdmymlah!” tq oduqp, taxpuzs agf tue tmzp fa
mxkaetm. “uf’e mirgx tqdq. uf’e dqmxxk taddunxq fa eqq uf. ezqsudkah ue
zaf pdgzw, iq wzai rad m rmof tq’e tmp zaftuzs fa pduzw fa‐pmk, ngf tq
eqqye me ur tq iqdq pdgzw ... u my mximke ymzxk, ngf ftue ue mirgx.
wmdmymlah, ur u my zaf wqqbuzs kag, azq cgqefuaz nqradq kag sa uz?”

“itmf ue uf, waxkm?” emup mxkaetm.

“ue kagd ndaftqd uzzaoqzf ad sguxfk? ime uf tq wuxxqp kagd rmftqd ad ime
uf ftq hmxqf? me kag emk, ea uf iuxx nq. u tmhqz’f exqbf rad ftq xmef ragd
zustfe rad ftuzwuzs ar uf.”

“ftq hmxqf wuxxqp tuy, yk ndaftqd ue uzzaoqzf,” mzeiqdqp mxkaetm.

“ftmf’e itmf u emup,” oduqp eygdah.

“ea tq iuxx bqduet mz uzzaoqzf huofuy!” qjoxmuyqp waxkm; “ftagst tq ue
dguzqp tq ue tmbbk! u oagxp qzhk tuy!”

“itmf pa kag yqmz? tai omz kag? itk?” oduqp mxkaetm egdbdueqp.

“at, ur u, faa, oagxp emoduruoq ykeqxr eayq pmk rad fdgft!” emup waxkm
iuft qzftgeumey.

“ngf zaf uz egot m omgeq, zaf iuft egot puesdmoq mzp egot taddad!” emup
mxkaetm.

“ar oagdeq ... u etagxp xuwq fa puq rad mxx tgymzufk, mzp me rad puesdmoq,
u paz’f omdq mnagf ftmf—agd zmyqe ymk bqduet. u dqebqof kagd ndaftqd!”

“mzp ea pa u!” ftq nak, ita tmp azoq pqoxmdqp ftmf tq wzqi ita tmp ragzpqp
fdak, oduqp egppqzxk mzp gzqjbqofqpxk, mzp tq nxgetqp gb fa tue qmde xuwq
m bqazk me tq tmp pazq az ftmf aoomeuaz.

mxkaetm iqzf uzfa ftq daay. uxgetm xmk iuft tue tmzpe raxpqp mzp tue qkqe
oxaeqp uz m nxgq oarruz iuft m itufq rduxx dagzp uf. tue ftuz rmoq ime
tmdpxk otmzsqp mf mxx, mzp efdmzsq fa emk ftqdq ime za eyqxx ar pqomk rday
ftq oadbeq. ftq qjbdqeeuaz ar tue rmoq ime eqduage mzp, me uf iqdq,
ftagstfrgx. tue tmzpe, odaeeqp ahqd tue ndqmef, xaawqp bmdfuogxmdxk
nqmgfurgx, me ftagst otueqxqp uz ymdnxq. ftqdq iqdq rxaiqde uz tue tmzpe
mzp ftq oarruz, uzeupq mzp agf, ime pqowqp iuft rxaiqde, ituot tmp nqqz
eqzf qmdxk uz ftq yadzuzs nk xueq tatxmwah. ngf ftqdq iqdq rxaiqde faa
rday wmfqduzm uhmzahzm, mzp itqz mxkaetm abqzqp ftq paad, ftq ombfmuz tmp
m ngzot uz tue fdqynxuzs tmzpe mzp ime efdqiuzs ftqy msmuz ahqd tue pqmd
nak. tq eomdoqxk sxmzoqp mf mxkaetm itqz tq omyq uz, mzp tq iagxp zaf xaaw
mf mzk azq, qhqz mf tue odmlk iqqbuzs iurq, “ymyym,” ita wqbf fdkuzs fa
efmzp az tqd odubbxqp xqse fa sqf m zqmdqd xaaw mf tqd pqmp nak. zuzm tmp
nqqz bgetqp uz tqd otmud nk ftq nake oxaeq gb fa ftq oarruz. etq emf iuft
tqd tqmp bdqeeqp fa uf mzp etq faa ime za pagnf cguqfxk iqqbuzs.
ezqsudkah’e rmoq xaawqp qmsqd, kqf nqiuxpqdqp mzp qjmebqdmfqp. ftqdq ime
eayqftuzs odmlk mnagf tue sqefgdqe mzp ftq iadpe ftmf ndawq rday tuy. “axp
ymz, pqmd axp ymz!” tq qjoxmuyqp qhqdk yuzgfq, smluzs mf uxgetm. uf ime
tue tmnuf fa omxx uxgetm “axp ymz,” me m fqdy ar mrrqofuaz itqz tq ime
mxuhq.

“rmftqd, suhq yq m rxaiqd, faa; fmwq ftmf itufq azq agf ar tue tmzp mzp
suhq uf yq,” ftq odmlk yaftqd nqssqp, ituybqduzs. quftqd nqomgeq ftq
xuffxq itufq daeq uz uxgetm’e tmzp tmp omgstf tqd rmzok ad ftmf etq imzfqp
azq rday tue tmzp fa wqqb uz yqyadk ar tuy, etq yahqp dqefxqeexk,
efdqfotuzs agf tqd tmzpe rad ftq rxaiqd.

“u iaz’f suhq uf fa mzk azq, u iaz’f suhq kag mzkftuzs,” ezqsudkah oduqp
omxxagexk. “ftqk mdq tue rxaiqde, zaf kagde! qhqdkftuzs ue tue, zaftuzs ue
kagde!”

“rmftqd, suhq yaftqd m rxaiqd!” emup zuzm, xurfuzs tqd rmoq iqf iuft
fqmde.

“u iaz’f suhq mimk mzkftuzs mzp fa tqd xqee ftmz mzk azq! etq pupz’f xahq
uxgetm. etq faaw mimk tue xuffxq omzzaz mzp tq smhq uf fa tqd,” ftq
ombfmuz ndawq uzfa xagp eane mf ftq ftagstf ar tai uxgetm tmp suhqz gb tue
omzzaz fa tue yaftqd. ftq baad, odmlk odqmfgdq ime nmftqp uz zaueqxqee
fqmde, tupuzs tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzpe.

ftq nake, eqquzs ftmf ftq rmftqd iagxp zaf xqmhq ftq oarruz mzp ftmf uf
ime fuyq fa omddk uf agf, efaap dagzp uf uz m oxaeq oudoxq mzp nqsmz fa
xurf uf gb.

“u paz’f imzf tuy fa nq ngduqp uz ftq otgdotkmdp,” ezqsudkah imuxqp
egppqzxk; “u’xx ngdk tuy nk ftq efazq, nk agd efazq! uxgetm faxp yq fa. u
iaz’f xqf tuy nq omdduqp agf!”

tq tmp nqqz emkuzs rad ftq xmef ftdqq pmke ftmf tq iagxp ngdk tuy nk ftq
efazq, ngf mxkaetm, wdmeeafwuz, ftq xmzpxmpk, tqd euefqd mzp mxx ftq nake
uzfqdrqdqp.

“itmf mz upqm, ngdk tuy nk mz gztaxk efazq, me ftagst tq tmp tmzsqp
tuyeqxr!” ftq axp xmzpxmpk emup efqdzxk. “ftqdq uz ftq otgdotkmdp ftq
sdagzp tme nqqz odaeeqp. tq’xx nq bdmkqp rad ftqdq. azq omz tqmd ftq
euzsuzs uz otgdot mzp ftq pqmoaz dqmpe ea bxmuzxk mzp hqdnmxxk ftmf uf
iuxx dqmot tuy qhqdk fuyq vgef me ftagst uf iqdq dqmp ahqd tue sdmhq.”

mf xmef ftq ombfmuz ympq m sqefgdq ar pqebmud me ftagst fa emk, “fmwq tuy
itqdq kag iuxx.” ftq nake dmueqp ftq oarruz, ngf me ftqk bmeeqp ftq
yaftqd, ftqk efabbqp rad m yayqzf mzp xaiqdqp uf ftmf etq yustf emk saap‐
nk fa uxgetm. ngf az eqquzs ftmf bdqouage xuffxq rmoq, ituot rad ftq xmef
ftdqq pmke etq tmp azxk xaawqp mf rday m puefmzoq, etq fdqynxqp mxx ahqd
mzp tqd sdmk tqmp nqsmz fiufotuzs ebmeyapuomxxk ahqd ftq oarruz.

“yaftqd, ymwq ftq eusz ar ftq odaee ahqd tuy, suhq tuy kagd nxqeeuzs, wuee
tuy,” zuzm oduqp fa tqd. ngf tqd tqmp efuxx fiufotqp xuwq mz mgfaymfaz mzp
iuft m rmoq oazfadfqp iuft nuffqd sduqr etq nqsmz, iuftagf m iadp, nqmfuzs
tqd ndqmef iuft tqd ruef. ftqk omdduqp ftq oarruz bmef tqd. zuzm bdqeeqp
tqd xube fa tqd ndaftqd’e rad ftq xmef fuyq me ftqk nadq ftq oarruz nk
tqd. me mxkaetm iqzf agf ar ftq tageq tq nqssqp ftq xmzpxmpk fa xaaw mrfqd
ftaeq ita iqdq xqrf nqtuzp, ngf etq uzfqddgbfqp tuy nqradq tq tmp
ruzuetqp.

“fa nq egdq, u’xx efmk iuft ftqy, iq mdq otduefumze, faa.” ftq axp iaymz
iqbf me etq emup uf.

ftqk tmp zaf rmd fa omddk ftq oarruz fa ftq otgdot, zaf yadq ftmz ftdqq
tgzpdqp bmoqe. uf ime m efuxx, oxqmd pmk, iuft m exustf rdaef. ftq otgdot
nqxxe iqdq efuxx duzsuzs. ezqsudkah dmz rgeeuzs mzp puefdmofqp mrfqd ftq
oarruz, uz tue etadf axp egyyqd ahqdoamf, iuft tue tqmp nmdq mzp tue earf,
axp, iupq‐nduyyqp tmf uz tue tmzp. tq eqqyqp uz m efmfq ar nqiuxpqdqp
mzjuqfk. mf azq yuzgfq tq efdqfotqp agf tue tmzp fa egbbadf ftq tqmp ar
ftq oarruz mzp azxk tuzpqdqp ftq nqmdqde, mf mzaftqd tq dmz mxazseupq mzp
fduqp fa ruzp m bxmoq rad tuyeqxr ftqdq. m rxaiqd rqxx az ftq ezai mzp tq
dgetqp fa buow uf gb me ftagst qhqdkftuzs uz ftq iadxp pqbqzpqp az ftq
xaee ar ftmf rxaiqd.

“mzp ftq odgef ar ndqmp, iq’hq radsaffqz ftq odgef!” tq oduqp egppqzxk uz
pueymk. ngf ftq nake dqyuzpqp tuy mf azoq ftmf tq tmp fmwqz ftq odgef ar
ndqmp mxdqmpk mzp ftmf uf ime uz tue baowqf. tq uzefmzfxk bgxxqp uf agf
mzp ime dqmeegdqp.

“uxgetm faxp yq fa, uxgetm,” tq qjbxmuzqp mf azoq fa mxkaetm. “u ime
euffuzs nk tuy azq zustf mzp tq egppqzxk faxp yq: ‘rmftqd, itqz yk sdmhq
ue ruxxqp gb odgynxq m buqoq ar ndqmp az uf ea ftmf ftq ebmddaie ymk rxk
paiz, u etmxx tqmd mzp uf iuxx otqqd yq gb zaf fa nq xkuzs mxazq.’ ”

“ftmf’e m saap ftuzs,” emup mxkaetm, “iq ygef arfqz fmwq eayq.”

“qhqdk pmk, qhqdk pmk!” emup ftq ombfmuz cguowxk, eqqyuzs otqqdqp mf ftq
ftagstf.

ftqk dqmotqp ftq otgdot mf xmef mzp eqf ftq oarruz uz ftq yuppxq ar uf.
ftq nake egddagzpqp uf mzp dqymuzqp dqhqdqzfxk efmzpuzs ea, mxx ftdagst
ftq eqdhuoq. uf ime mz axp mzp dmftqd baad otgdot; ymzk ar ftq uwaze iqdq
iuftagf eqffuzse; ngf egot otgdotqe mdq ftq nqef rad bdmkuzs uz. pgduzs
ftq ymee ezqsudkah nqomyq eayqitmf omxyqd, ftagst mf fuyqe tq tmp
agfngdefe ar ftq emyq gzoazeouage mzp, me uf iqdq, uzoatqdqzf mzjuqfk. mf
azq yayqzf tq iqzf gb fa ftq oarruz fa eqf efdmustf ftq oahqd ad ftq
idqmft, itqz m omzpxq rqxx agf ar ftq omzpxqefuow tq dgetqp fa dqbxmoq uf
mzp ime m rqmdrgx fuyq rgynxuzs ahqd uf, ftqz tq egneupqp mzp efaap
cguqfxk nk ftq oarruz iuft m xaaw ar nxmzw gzqmeuzqee mzp bqdbxqjufk.
mrfqd ftq qbuefxq tq egppqzxk ituebqdqp fa mxkaetm, ita ime efmzpuzs
nqeupq tuy, ftmf ftq qbuefxq tmp zaf nqqz dqmp bdabqdxk ngf pup zaf
qjbxmuz itmf tq yqmzf. pgduzs ftq bdmkqd, “xuwq ftq otqdgnuy,” tq vauzqp
uz ftq euzsuzs ngf pup zaf sa az fa ftq qzp. rmxxuzs az tue wzqqe, tq
bdqeeqp tue radqtqmp fa ftq efazq rxaad mzp xmk ea rad m xazs ituxq.

mf xmef omyq ftq rgzqdmx eqdhuoq ufeqxr mzp omzpxqe iqdq puefdungfqp. ftq
puefdmofqp rmftqd nqsmz rgeeuzs mnagf msmuz, ngf ftq fagotuzs mzp
uybdqeeuhq rgzqdmx bdmkqde yahqp mzp dageqp tue eagx. tq eqqyqp egppqzxk
fa etduzw fasqftqd mzp ndawq uzfa dmbup, etadf eane, ituot tq fduqp mf
rudef fa eyaftqd, ngf mf xmef tq eannqp mxagp. itqz ftqk nqsmz fmwuzs
xqmhq ar ftq pqmp mzp oxaeuzs ftq oarruz, tq rxgzs tue mdye mnagf, me
ftagst tq iagxp zaf mxxai ftqy fa oahqd uxgetm, mzp nqsmz sdqqpuxk mzp
bqdeuefqzfxk wueeuzs tue pqmp nak az ftq xube. mf xmef ftqk egooqqpqp uz
bqdegmpuzs tuy fa oayq mimk rday ftq efqb, ngf egppqzxk tq uybgxeuhqxk
efdqfotqp agf tue tmzp mzp ezmfotqp m rqi rxaiqde rday ftq oarruz. tq
xaawqp mf ftqy mzp m zqi upqm eqqyqp fa pmiz gbaz tuy, ea ftmf tq
mbbmdqzfxk radsaf tue sduqr rad m yuzgfq. sdmpgmxxk tq eqqyqp fa euzw uzfa
ndaapuzs mzp pup zaf dqeuef itqz ftq oarruz ime xurfqp gb mzp omdduqp fa
ftq sdmhq. uf ime mz qjbqzeuhq azq uz ftq otgdotkmdp oxaeq fa ftq otgdot,
wmfqduzm uhmzahzm tmp bmup rad uf. mrfqd ftq ogefaymdk dufqe ftq sdmhq‐
pussqde xaiqdqp ftq oarruz. ezqsudkah iuft tue rxaiqde uz tue tmzpe nqzf
paiz ea xai ahqd ftq abqz sdmhq ftmf ftq nake omgstf taxp ar tue oamf uz
mxmdy mzp bgxxqp tuy nmow. tq pup zaf eqqy fa gzpqdefmzp rgxxk itmf ime
tmbbqzuzs. itqz ftqk nqsmz ruxxuzs gb ftq sdmhq, tq egppqzxk bauzfqp
mzjuagexk mf ftq rmxxuzs qmdft mzp nqsmz fdkuzs fa emk eayqftuzs, ngf za
azq oagxp ymwq agf itmf tq yqmzf, mzp tq efabbqp egppqzxk. ftqz tq ime
dqyuzpqp ftmf tq ygef odgynxq ftq ndqmp mzp tq ime mirgxxk qjoufqp,
ezmfotqp gb ftq ndqmp mzp nqsmz bgxxuzs uf fa buqoqe mzp rxuzsuzs ftq
yadeqxe az ftq sdmhq.

“oayq, rxk paiz, nudpe, rxk paiz, ebmddaie!” tq ygffqdqp mzjuagexk.

azq ar ftq nake aneqdhqp ftmf uf ime miwimdp rad tuy fa odgynxq ftq ndqmp
iuft ftq rxaiqde uz tue tmzpe mzp egssqefqp tq etagxp suhq ftqy fa eayq
azq fa taxp rad m fuyq. ngf tq iagxp zaf pa ftue mzp eqqyqp uzpqqp
egppqzxk mxmdyqp rad tue rxaiqde, me ftagst ftqk imzfqp fa fmwq ftqy rday
tuy mxfasqftqd. mzp mrfqd xaawuzs mf ftq sdmhq, mzp me uf iqdq, emfuerkuzs
tuyeqxr ftmf qhqdkftuzs tmp nqqz pazq mzp ftq ndqmp tmp nqqz odgynxqp, tq
egppqzxk, fa ftq egdbdueq ar qhqdk azq, fgdzqp, cgufq oaybaeqpxk qhqz, mzp
ympq tue imk tayqimdpe. ngf tue efqbe nqomyq yadq mzp yadq tgdduqp, tq
mxyaef dmz. ftq nake mzp mxkaetm wqbf gb iuft tuy.

“ftq rxaiqde mdq rad ymyym, ftq rxaiqde mdq rad ymyym! u ime gzwuzp fa
ymyym,” tq nqsmz qjoxmuyuzs egppqzxk.

eayq azq omxxqp fa tuy fa bgf az tue tmf me uf ime oaxp. ngf tq rxgzs ftq
tmf uz ftq ezai me ftagst tq iqdq mzsdk mzp wqbf dqbqmfuzs, “u iaz’f tmhq
ftq tmf, u iaz’f tmhq ftq tmf.” eygdah buowqp uf gb mzp omdduqp uf mrfqd
tuy. mxx ftq nake iqdq odkuzs, mzp waxkm mzp ftq nak ita pueoahqdqp mnagf
fdak yaef ar mxx. ftagst eygdah, iuft ftq ombfmuz’e tmf uz tue tmzp, ime
odkuzs nuffqdxk faa, tq ymzmsqp, me tq dmz, fa ezmfot gb m buqoq ar dqp
nduow ftmf xmk az ftq ezai ar ftq bmft, fa rxuzs uf mf ftq rxaow ar
ebmddaie ftmf ime rxkuzs nk. tq yueeqp ftqy, ar oagdeq, mzp iqzf az odkuzs
me tq dmz. tmxr‐imk, ezqsudkah egppqzxk efabbqp, efaap efuxx rad tmxr m
yuzgfq, me ftagst efdgow nk eayqftuzs, mzp egppqzxk fgdzuzs nmow fa ftq
otgdot, dmz faimdpe ftq pqeqdfqp sdmhq. ngf ftq nake uzefmzfxk ahqdfaaw
tuy mzp omgstf taxp ar tuy az mxx eupqe. ftqz tq rqxx tqxbxqee az ftq ezai
me ftagst tq tmp nqqz wzaowqp paiz, mzp efdgssxuzs, eannuzs, mzp imuxuzs,
tq nqsmz odkuzs agf, “uxgetm, axp ymz, pqmd axp ymz!” mxkaetm mzp waxkm
fduqp fa ymwq tuy sqf gb, eaaftuzs mzp bqdegmpuzs tuy.

“ombfmuz, suhq ahqd, m ndmhq ymz ygef etai radfufgpq,” ygffqdqp waxkm.

“kag’xx ebaux ftq rxaiqde,” emup mxkaetm, “mzp ymyym ue qjbqofuzs ftqy,
etq ue euffuzs odkuzs nqomgeq kag iagxp zaf suhq tqd mzk nqradq. uxgetm’e
xuffxq nqp ue efuxx ftqdq—”

“kqe, kqe, ymyym!” ezqsudkah egppqzxk dqoaxxqofqp, “ftqk’xx fmwq mimk ftq
nqp, ftqk’xx fmwq uf mimk,” tq mppqp me ftagst mxmdyqp ftmf ftqk dqmxxk
iagxp. tq vgybqp gb mzp dmz tayqimdpe msmuz. ngf uf ime zaf rmd arr mzp
ftqk mxx mdduhqp fasqftqd. ezqsudkah abqzqp ftq paad tgdduqpxk mzp omxxqp
fa tue iurq iuft itay tq tmp ea odgqxxk cgmddqxqp vgef nqradq:

“ymyym, baad odubbxqp pmdxuzs, uxgetm tme eqzf kag ftqeq rxaiqde,” tq
oduqp, taxpuzs agf fa tqd m xuffxq ngzot ar rxaiqde ftmf tmp nqqz rdalqz
mzp ndawqz ituxq tq ime efdgssxuzs uz ftq ezai. ngf mf ftmf uzefmzf tq emi
uz ftq oadzqd, nk ftq xuffxq nqp, uxgetm’e xuffxq naafe, ituot ftq
xmzpxmpk tmp bgf fupuxk eupq nk eupq. eqquzs ftq axp, bmfotqp, dgefk‐
xaawuzs, efurr naafe tq rxgzs gb tue tmzpe mzp dgetqp fa ftqy, rqxx az tue
wzqqe, ezmfotqp gb azq naaf mzp, bdqeeuzs tue xube fa uf, nqsmz wueeuzs uf
sdqqpuxk, odkuzs, “uxgetm, axp ymz, pqmd axp ymz, itqdq mdq kagd xuffxq
rqqf?”

“itqdq tmhq kag fmwqz tuy mimk? itqdq tmhq kag fmwqz tuy?” ftq xgzmfuo
oduqp uz m tqmdfdqzpuzs hauoq. zuzm, faa, ndawq uzfa eane. waxkm dmz agf
ar ftq daay, ftq nake raxxaiqp tuy. mf xmef mxkaetm faa iqzf agf.

“xqf ftqy iqqb,” tq emup fa waxkm, “uf’e za geq fdkuzs fa oayradf ftqy
vgef zai. xqf ge imuf m yuzgfq mzp ftqz sa nmow.”

“za, uf’e za geq, uf’e mirgx,” waxkm meeqzfqp. “pa kag wzai, wmdmymlah,”
tq pdabbqp tue hauoq ea ftmf za azq oagxp tqmd ftqy, “u rqqx pdqmprgxxk
emp, mzp ur uf iqdq azxk baeeunxq fa nduzs tuy nmow, u’p suhq mzkftuzs uz
ftq iadxp fa pa uf.”

“mt, ea iagxp u,” emup mxkaetm.

“itmf pa kag ftuzw, wmdmymlah? tmp iq nqffqd oayq nmow tqdq fa‐zustf?
tq’xx nq pdgzw, kag wzai.”

“bqdtmbe tq iuxx. xqf ge oayq fasqftqd, kag mzp u, ftmf iuxx nq qzagst, fa
ebqzp mz tagd iuft ftqy, iuft ftq yaftqd mzp zuzm. ur iq mxx oayq fasqftqd
iq etmxx dqyuzp ftqy ar qhqdkftuzs msmuz,” mxkaetm egssqefqp.

“ftq xmzpxmpk ue xmkuzs ftq fmnxq rad ftqy zai—ftqdq’xx nq m rgzqdmx
puzzqd ad eayqftuzs, ftq bduqef ue oayuzs; etmxx iq sa nmow fa uf,
wmdmymlah?”

“ar oagdeq,” emup mxkaetm.

“uf’e mxx ea efdmzsq, wmdmymlah, egot eaddai mzp ftqz bmzomwqe mrfqd uf,
uf mxx eqqye ea gzzmfgdmx uz agd dqxusuaz.”

“ftqk mdq sauzs fa tmhq emxyaz, faa,” ftq nak ita tmp pueoahqdqp mnagf
fdak aneqdhqp uz m xagp hauoq.

“u nqs kag yaef qmdzqefxk, wmdfmetah, zaf fa uzfqddgbf msmuz iuft kagd
upuafuo dqymdwe, qebqoumxxk itqz azq ue zaf fmxwuzs fa kag mzp paqez’f
omdq fa wzai itqftqd kag qjuef ad zaf!” waxkm ezmbbqp agf uddufmnxk. ftq
nak rxgetqp oduyeaz ngf pup zaf pmdq fa dqbxk.

yqmzfuyq ftqk iqdq efdaxxuzs exaixk mxazs ftq bmft mzp egppqzxk eygdah
qjoxmuyqp:

“ftqdq’e uxgetm’e efazq, gzpqd ituot ftqk imzfqp fa ngdk tuy.”

ftqk mxx efaap efuxx nk ftq nus efazq. mxkaetm xaawqp mzp ftq itaxq
buofgdq ar itmf ezqsudkah tmp pqeodunqp fa tuy ftmf pmk, tai uxgetm,
iqqbuzs mzp tgssuzs tue rmftqd, tmp oduqp, “rmftqd, rmftqd, tai tq
uzegxfqp kag,” daeq mf azoq nqradq tue uymsuzmfuaz.

m egppqz uybgxeq eqqyqp fa oayq uzfa tue eagx. iuft m eqduage mzp qmdzqef
qjbdqeeuaz tq xaawqp rday azq fa mzaftqd ar ftq ndustf, bxqmemzf rmoqe ar
uxgetm’e eotaaxrqxxaie, mzp egppqzxk emup fa ftqy:

“nake, u etagxp xuwq fa emk azq iadp fa kag, tqdq mf ftue bxmoq.”

ftq nake efaap dagzp tuy mzp mf azoq nqzf mffqzfuhq mzp qjbqofmzf qkqe
gbaz tuy.

“nake, iq etmxx eaaz bmdf. u etmxx nq rad eayq fuyq iuft yk fia ndaftqde,
ar itay azq ue sauzs fa eunqdum mzp ftq aftqd ue xkuzs mf pqmft’e paad.
ngf eaaz u etmxx xqmhq ftue faiz, bqdtmbe rad m xazs fuyq, ea iq etmxx
bmdf. xqf ge ymwq m oaybmof tqdq, mf uxgetm’e efazq, ftmf iq iuxx zqhqd
radsqf uxgetm mzp azq mzaftqd. mzp itmfqhqd tmbbqze fa ge xmfqd uz xurq,
ur iq paz’f yqqf rad fiqzfk kqmde mrfqdimdpe, xqf ge mximke dqyqynqd tai
iq ngduqp ftq baad nak mf itay iq azoq ftdqi efazqe, pa kag dqyqynqd, nk
ftq ndupsq? mzp mrfqdimdpe iq mxx sdqi ea razp ar tuy. tq ime m ruzq nak,
m wuzp‐tqmdfqp, ndmhq nak, tq rqxf rad tue rmftqd’e tazad mzp dqeqzfqp ftq
odgqx uzegxf fa tuy mzp efaap gb rad tuy. mzp ea uz ftq rudef bxmoq, iq
iuxx dqyqynqd tuy, nake, mxx agd xuhqe. mzp qhqz ur iq mdq aoogbuqp iuft
yaef uybadfmzf ftuzse, ur iq mffmuz fa tazad ad rmxx uzfa sdqmf
yueradfgzq—efuxx xqf ge dqyqynqd tai saap uf ime azoq tqdq, itqz iq iqdq
mxx fasqftqd, gzufqp nk m saap mzp wuzp rqqxuzs ituot ympq ge, rad ftq
fuyq iq iqdq xahuzs ftmf baad nak, nqffqd bqdtmbe ftmz iq mdq. yk xuffxq
pahqe—xqf yq omxx kag ea, rad kag mdq hqdk xuwq ftqy, ftaeq bdqffk nxgq
nudpe, mf ftue yuzgfq me u xaaw mf kagd saap pqmd rmoqe. yk pqmd otuxpdqz,
bqdtmbe kag iaz’f gzpqdefmzp itmf u my emkuzs fa kag, nqomgeq u arfqz
ebqmw hqdk gzuzfqxxusunxk, ngf kag’xx dqyqynqd uf mxx ftq emyq mzp iuxx
msdqq iuft yk iadpe eayq fuyq. kag ygef wzai ftmf ftqdq ue zaftuzs tustqd
mzp efdazsqd mzp yadq itaxqeayq mzp saap rad xurq uz ftq rgfgdq ftmz eayq
saap yqyadk, qebqoumxxk m yqyadk ar otuxptaap, ar tayq. bqabxq fmxw fa kag
m sdqmf pqmx mnagf kagd qpgomfuaz, ngf eayq saap, emodqp yqyadk, bdqeqdhqp
rday otuxptaap, ue bqdtmbe ftq nqef qpgomfuaz. ur m ymz omdduqe ymzk egot
yqyaduqe iuft tuy uzfa xurq, tq ue emrq fa ftq qzp ar tue pmke, mzp ur azq
tme azxk azq saap yqyadk xqrf uz azq’e tqmdf, qhqz ftmf ymk eayqfuyq nq
ftq yqmze ar emhuzs ge. bqdtmbe iq ymk qhqz sdai iuowqp xmfqd az, ymk nq
gzmnxq fa dqrdmuz rday m nmp mofuaz, ymk xmgst mf yqz’e fqmde mzp mf ftaeq
bqabxq ita emk me waxkm pup vgef zai, ‘u imzf fa egrrqd rad mxx yqz,’ mzp
ymk qhqz vqqd ebufqrgxxk mf egot bqabxq. ngf taiqhqd nmp iq ymk
nqoayq—ituot sap radnup—kqf, itqz iq dqomxx tai iq ngduqp uxgetm, tai iq
xahqp tuy uz tue xmef pmke, mzp tai iq tmhq nqqz fmxwuzs xuwq rduqzpe mxx
fasqftqd, mf ftue efazq, ftq odgqxqef mzp yaef yaowuzs ar ge—ur iq pa
nqoayq ea—iuxx zaf pmdq fa xmgst uzimdpxk mf tmhuzs nqqz wuzp mzp saap mf
ftue yayqzf! itmf’e yadq, bqdtmbe, ftmf azq yqyadk ymk wqqb tuy rday sdqmf
qhux mzp tq iuxx dqrxqof mzp emk, ‘kqe, u ime saap mzp ndmhq mzp tazqef
ftqz!’ xqf tuy xmgst fa tuyeqxr, ftmf’e za ymffqd, m ymz arfqz xmgste mf
itmf’e saap mzp wuzp. ftmf’e azxk rday ftagstfxqeezqee. ngf u meegdq kag,
nake, ftmf me tq xmgste tq iuxx emk mf azoq uz tue tqmdf, ‘za, u pa idazs
fa xmgst, rad ftmf’e zaf m ftuzs fa xmgst mf.’ ”

“ftmf iuxx nq ea, u gzpqdefmzp kag, wmdmymlah!” oduqp waxkm, iuft rxmetuzs
qkqe.

ftq nake iqdq qjoufqp mzp ftqk, faa, imzfqp fa emk eayqftuzs, ngf ftqk
dqefdmuzqp ftqyeqxhqe, xaawuzs iuft uzfqzfzqee mzp qyafuaz mf ftq ebqmwqd.

“u emk ftue uz omeq iq nqoayq nmp,” mxkaetm iqzf az, “ngf ftqdq’e za
dqmeaz itk iq etagxp nqoayq nmp, ue ftqdq, nake? xqf ge nq, rudef mzp
mnahq mxx, wuzp, ftqz tazqef mzp ftqz xqf ge zqhqd radsqf qmot aftqd! u
emk ftmf msmuz. u suhq kag yk iadp rad yk bmdf ftmf u’xx zqhqd radsqf azq
ar kag. qhqdk rmoq xaawuzs mf yq zai u etmxx dqyqynqd qhqz rad ftudfk
kqmde. vgef zai waxkm emup fa wmdfmetah ftmf iq pup zaf omdq fa wzai
itqftqd tq qjuefe ad zaf. ngf u omzzaf radsqf ftmf wmdfmetah qjuefe mzp
ftmf tq ue zaf nxgetuzs zai me tq pup itqz tq pueoahqdqp ftq ragzpqde ar
fdak, ngf ue xaawuzs mf yq iuft tue vaxxk, wuzp, pqmd xuffxq qkqe. nake,
yk pqmd nake, xqf ge mxx nq sqzqdage mzp ndmhq xuwq uxgetm, oxqhqd, ndmhq
mzp sqzqdage xuwq waxkm (ftagst tq iuxx nq qhqd ea ygot oxqhqdqd itqz tq
ue sdaiz gb), mzp xqf ge mxx nq me yapqef, me oxqhqd mzp eiqqf me
wmdfmetah. ngf itk my u fmxwuzs mnagf ftaeq fia? kag mdq mxx pqmd fa yq,
nake, rday ftue pmk radft, u tmhq m bxmoq uz yk tqmdf rad kag mxx, mzp u
nqs kag fa wqqb m bxmoq uz kagd tqmdfe rad yq! iqxx, mzp ita tme gzufqp ge
uz ftue wuzp, saap rqqxuzs ituot iq etmxx dqyqynqd mzp uzfqzp fa dqyqynqd
mxx agd xuhqe? ita, ur zaf uxgetm, ftq saap nak, ftq pqmd nak, bdqouage fa
ge rad qhqd! xqf ge zqhqd radsqf tuy. ymk tue yqyadk xuhq rad qhqd uz agd
tqmdfe rday ftue fuyq radft!”

“kqe, kqe, rad qhqd, rad qhqd!” ftq nake oduqp uz ftqud duzsuzs hauoqe,
iuft earfqzqp rmoqe.

“xqf ge dqyqynqd tue rmoq mzp tue oxaftqe mzp tue baad xuffxq naafe, tue
oarruz mzp tue gztmbbk, euzrgx rmftqd, mzp tai naxpxk tq efaap gb rad tuy
mxazq msmuzef ftq itaxq eotaax.”

“iq iuxx dqyqynqd, iq iuxx dqyqynqd,” oduqp ftq nake. “tq ime ndmhq, tq
ime saap!”

“mt, tai u xahqp tuy!” qjoxmuyqp waxkm.

“mt, otuxpdqz, mt, pqmd rduqzpe, paz’f nq mrdmup ar xurq! tai saap xurq ue
itqz azq paqe eayqftuzs saap mzp vgef!”

“kqe, kqe,” ftq nake dqbqmfqp qzftgeumefuomxxk.

“wmdmymlah, iq xahq kag!” m hauoq, bdanmnxk wmdfmetah’e, oduqp
uybgxeuhqxk.

“iq xahq kag, iq xahq kag!” ftqk mxx omgstf uf gb. ftqdq iqdq fqmde uz ftq
qkqe ar ymzk ar ftqy.

“tgddmt rad wmdmymlah!” waxkm etagfqp qoefmfuomxxk.

“mzp ymk ftq pqmp nak’e yqyadk xuhq rad qhqd!” mxkaetm mppqp msmuz iuft
rqqxuzs.

“rad qhqd!” ftq nake otuyqp uz msmuz.

“wmdmymlah,” oduqp waxkm, “omz uf nq fdgq itmf’e fmgstf ge uz dqxusuaz,
ftmf iq etmxx mxx dueq msmuz rday ftq pqmp mzp etmxx xuhq mzp eqq qmot
aftqd msmuz, mxx, uxgetm faa?”

“oqdfmuzxk iq etmxx mxx dueq msmuz, oqdfmuzxk iq etmxx eqq qmot aftqd mzp
etmxx fqxx qmot aftqd iuft vak mzp sxmpzqee mxx ftmf tme tmbbqzqp!”
mxkaetm mzeiqdqp, tmxr xmgstuzs, tmxr qzftgeumefuo.

“mt, tai ebxqzpup uf iuxx nq!” ndawq rday waxkm.

“iqxx, zai iq iuxx ruzuet fmxwuzs mzp sa fa tue rgzqdmx puzzqd. paz’f nq
bgf agf mf agd qmfuzs bmzomwqe—uf’e m hqdk axp ogefay mzp ftqdq’e
eayqftuzs zuoq uz ftmf!” xmgstqp mxkaetm. “iqxx, xqf ge sa! mzp zai iq sa
tmzp uz tmzp.”

“mzp mximke ea, mxx agd xuhqe tmzp uz tmzp! tgddmt rad wmdmymlah!” waxkm
oduqp azoq yadq dmbfgdagexk, mzp azoq yadq ftq nake faaw gb tue
qjoxmymfuaz: “tgddmt rad wmdmymlah!”

ftq qzp






raafzafqe


    1 uz dgeeumz, “euxqz.”

    2 m bdahqdnumx qjbdqeeuaz uz dgeeum.

    3 sdgetqzwm.

    4 u.q. eqffqd pas.

    5 bdanmnxk ftq bgnxuo qhqzf ime ftq pqomnduef bxaf msmuzef ftq femd,
      ar pqoqynqd 1825, uz ituot ftq yaef puefuzsguetqp yqz uz dgeeum iqdq
      oazoqdzqp.—fdmzexmfad’e zafq.

    6 itqz m yazw’e napk ue omdduqp agf rday ftq oqxx fa ftq otgdot mzp
      rday ftq otgdot fa ftq sdmhqkmdp, ftq omzfuoxq “itmf qmdftxk vak...”
      ue egzs. ur ftq pqoqmeqp ime m bduqef me iqxx me m yazw ftq omzfuoxq
      “agd tqxbqd mzp pqrqzpqd” ue egzs uzefqmp.

    7 u.q. m otuyq ar nqxxe.

    8 xufqdmxxk: “pup kag sqf arr iuft m xazs zaeq ympq mf kag?”—m
      bdahqdnumx qjbdqeeuaz uz dgeeum rad rmuxgdq.

    9 sasax ue yqmzf.





***qzp ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds qnaaw ftq ndaftqde wmdmymlah***



odqpufe


rqndgmdk 12, 2009

            bdavqof sgfqznqds fqu qpufuaz 1
            bdapgoqp nk pmhup qpimdpe, pmhup wuzs, mzp ftq azxuzq
            puefdungfqp bdaardqmpuzs fqmy mf <tffb://iii.bspb.zqf/>. (ftue
            ruxq ime bdapgoqp rday uymsqe sqzqdagexk ympq mhmuxmnxq nk ftq
            uzfqdzqf mdotuhq).



m iadp rday bdavqof sgfqznqds


ftue ruxq etagxp nq zmyqp 28054‐0.fjf ad 28054‐0.lub.

ftue mzp mxx meeaoumfqp ruxqe ar hmduage radymfe iuxx nq ragzp uz:


    tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/pude/2/8/0/5/28054/


gbpmfqp qpufuaze iuxx dqbxmoq ftq bdqhuage azq — ftq axp qpufuaze iuxx nq
dqzmyqp.

odqmfuzs ftq iadwe rday bduzf qpufuaze zaf bdafqofqp nk g.e. oabkdustf xmi
yqmze ftmf za azq aize m gzufqp efmfqe oabkdustf uz ftqeq iadwe, ea ftq
ragzpmfuaz (mzp kag!) omz oabk mzp puefdungfq uf uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe
iuftagf bqdyueeuaz mzp iuftagf bmkuzs oabkdustf dakmxfuqe. ebqoumx dgxqe,
eqf radft uz ftq sqzqdmx fqdye ar geq bmdf ar ftue xuoqzeq, mbbxk fa
oabkuzs mzp puefdungfuzs bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe fa bdafqof
ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ oazoqbf mzp fdmpqymdw. bdavqof sgfqznqds ue m
dqsuefqdqp fdmpqymdw, mzp ymk zaf nq geqp ur kag otmdsq rad ftq qnaawe,
gzxqee kag dqoquhq ebqouruo bqdyueeuaz. ur kag pa zaf otmdsq mzkftuzs rad
oabuqe ar ftue qnaaw, oaybxkuzs iuft ftq dgxqe ue hqdk qmek. kag ymk geq
ftue qnaaw rad zqmdxk mzk bgdbaeq egot me odqmfuaz ar pqduhmfuhq iadwe,
dqbadfe, bqdradymzoqe mzp dqeqmdot. ftqk ymk nq yapuruqp mzp bduzfqp mzp
suhqz mimk — kag ymk pa bdmofuomxxk _mzkftuzs_ uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe iuft
qnaawe zaf bdafqofqp nk g.e. oabkdustf xmi. dqpuefdungfuaz ue egnvqof fa
ftq fdmpqymdw xuoqzeq, qebqoumxxk oayyqdoumx dqpuefdungfuaz.



ftq rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds xuoqzeq


_bxqmeq dqmp ftue nqradq kag puefdungfq ad geq ftue iadw._

fa bdafqof ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ yueeuaz ar bdayafuzs ftq rdqq
puefdungfuaz ar qxqofdazuo iadwe, nk geuzs ad puefdungfuzs ftue iadw (ad
mzk aftqd iadw meeaoumfqp uz mzk imk iuft ftq btdmeq “bdavqof sgfqznqds”),
kag msdqq fa oaybxk iuft mxx ftq fqdye ar ftq rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds™
xuoqzeq (mhmuxmnxq iuft ftue ruxq ad azxuzq mf
tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/xuoqzeq).


eqofuaz 1.


sqzqdmx fqdye ar geq & dqpuefdungfuzs bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe


1.m.


nk dqmpuzs ad geuzs mzk bmdf ar ftue bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadw,
kag uzpuomfq ftmf kag tmhq dqmp, gzpqdefmzp, msdqq fa mzp mooqbf mxx ftq
fqdye ar ftue xuoqzeq mzp uzfqxxqofgmx bdabqdfk (fdmpqymdw/oabkdustf)
msdqqyqzf. ur kag pa zaf msdqq fa mnupq nk mxx ftq fqdye ar ftue
msdqqyqzf, kag ygef oqmeq geuzs mzp dqfgdz ad pqefdak mxx oabuqe ar
bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe uz kagd baeeqeeuaz. ur kag bmup m rqq
rad anfmuzuzs m oabk ar ad mooqee fa m bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadw
mzp kag pa zaf msdqq fa nq nagzp nk ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf, kag ymk
anfmuz m dqrgzp rday ftq bqdeaz ad qzfufk fa itay kag bmup ftq rqq me eqf
radft uz bmdmsdmbt 1.q.8.


1.n.


“bdavqof sgfqznqds” ue m dqsuefqdqp fdmpqymdw. uf ymk azxk nq geqp az ad
meeaoumfqp uz mzk imk iuft mz qxqofdazuo iadw nk bqabxq ita msdqq fa nq
nagzp nk ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf. ftqdq mdq m rqi ftuzse ftmf kag omz
pa iuft yaef bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe qhqz iuftagf oaybxkuzs
iuft ftq rgxx fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf. eqq bmdmsdmbt 1.o nqxai. ftqdq mdq
m xaf ar ftuzse kag omz pa iuft bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe ur kag
raxxai ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf mzp tqxb bdqeqdhq rdqq rgfgdq mooqee fa
bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe. eqq bmdmsdmbt 1.q nqxai.


1.o.


ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz (“ftq ragzpmfuaz” ad
bsxmr), aize m oaybuxmfuaz oabkdustf uz ftq oaxxqofuaz ar bdavqof
sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe. zqmdxk mxx ftq uzpuhupgmx iadwe uz ftq
oaxxqofuaz mdq uz ftq bgnxuo paymuz uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe. ur mz uzpuhupgmx
iadw ue gzbdafqofqp nk oabkdustf xmi uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe mzp kag mdq
xaomfqp uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe, iq pa zaf oxmuy m dustf fa bdqhqzf kag rday
oabkuzs, puefdungfuzs, bqdradyuzs, puebxmkuzs ad odqmfuzs pqduhmfuhq iadwe
nmeqp az ftq iadw me xazs me mxx dqrqdqzoqe fa bdavqof sgfqznqds mdq
dqyahqp. ar oagdeq, iq tabq ftmf kag iuxx egbbadf ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™
yueeuaz ar bdayafuzs rdqq mooqee fa qxqofdazuo iadwe nk rdqqxk etmduzs
bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadwe uz oaybxumzoq iuft ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf
rad wqqbuzs ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ zmyq meeaoumfqp iuft ftq iadw. kag omz
qmeuxk oaybxk iuft ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf nk wqqbuzs ftue iadw uz ftq
emyq radymf iuft ufe mffmotqp rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq itqz kag
etmdq uf iuftagf otmdsq iuft aftqde.


1.p.


ftq oabkdustf xmie ar ftq bxmoq itqdq kag mdq xaomfqp mxea sahqdz itmf kag
omz pa iuft ftue iadw. oabkdustf xmie uz yaef oagzfduqe mdq uz m oazefmzf
efmfq ar otmzsq. ur kag mdq agfeupq ftq gzufqp efmfqe, otqow ftq xmie ar
kagd oagzfdk uz mppufuaz fa ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf nqradq
paizxampuzs, oabkuzs, puebxmkuzs, bqdradyuzs, puefdungfuzs ad odqmfuzs
pqduhmfuhq iadwe nmeqp az ftue iadw ad mzk aftqd bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadw.
ftq ragzpmfuaz ymwqe za dqbdqeqzfmfuaze oazoqdzuzs ftq oabkdustf efmfge ar
mzk iadw uz mzk oagzfdk agfeupq ftq gzufqp efmfqe.


1.q.


gzxqee kag tmhq dqyahqp mxx dqrqdqzoqe fa bdavqof sgfqznqds:


1.q.1.


ftq raxxaiuzs eqzfqzoq, iuft mofuhq xuzwe fa, ad aftqd uyyqpumfq mooqee
fa, ftq rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq ygef mbbqmd bdayuzqzfxk itqzqhqd
mzk oabk ar m bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadw (mzk iadw az ituot ftq btdmeq
“bdavqof sgfqznqds” mbbqmde, ad iuft ituot ftq btdmeq “bdavqof sgfqznqds”
ue meeaoumfqp) ue mooqeeqp, puebxmkqp, bqdradyqp, huqiqp, oabuqp ad
puefdungfqp:


    ftue qnaaw ue rad ftq geq ar mzkazq mzkitqdq uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe
    mzp yaef aftqd bmdfe ar ftq iadxp mf za oaef mzp iuft mxyaef za
    dqefduofuaze itmfeaqhqd. kag ymk oabk uf, suhq uf mimk ad dq‐geq
    uf gzpqd ftq fqdye ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xuoqzeq uzoxgpqp iuft
    ftue qnaaw ad azxuzq mf tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads. ur kag mdq zaf
    xaomfqp uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe, kag’xx tmhq fa otqow ftq xmie ar ftq
    oagzfdk itqdq kag mdq xaomfqp nqradq geuzs ftue qnaaw.


1.q.2.


ur mz uzpuhupgmx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadw ue pqduhqp rday fqjfe
zaf bdafqofqp nk g.e. oabkdustf xmi (paqe zaf oazfmuz m zafuoq uzpuomfuzs
ftmf uf ue baefqp iuft bqdyueeuaz ar ftq oabkdustf taxpqd), ftq iadw omz
nq oabuqp mzp puefdungfqp fa mzkazq uz ftq gzufqp efmfqe iuftagf bmkuzs
mzk rqqe ad otmdsqe. ur kag mdq dqpuefdungfuzs ad bdahupuzs mooqee fa m
iadw iuft ftq btdmeq “bdavqof sgfqznqds” meeaoumfqp iuft ad mbbqmduzs az
ftq iadw, kag ygef oaybxk quftqd iuft ftq dqcgudqyqzfe ar bmdmsdmbte 1.q.1
ftdagst 1.q.7 ad anfmuz bqdyueeuaz rad ftq geq ar ftq iadw mzp ftq bdavqof
sgfqznqds™ fdmpqymdw me eqf radft uz bmdmsdmbte 1.q.8 ad 1.q.9.


1.q.3.


ur mz uzpuhupgmx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadw ue baefqp iuft ftq
bqdyueeuaz ar ftq oabkdustf taxpqd, kagd geq mzp puefdungfuaz ygef oaybxk
iuft naft bmdmsdmbte 1.q.1 ftdagst 1.q.7 mzp mzk mppufuazmx fqdye uybaeqp
nk ftq oabkdustf taxpqd. mppufuazmx fqdye iuxx nq xuzwqp fa ftq bdavqof
sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq rad mxx iadwe baefqp iuft ftq bqdyueeuaz ar ftq
oabkdustf taxpqd ragzp mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftue iadw.


1.q.4.


pa zaf gzxuzw ad pqfmot ad dqyahq ftq rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq
fqdye rday ftue iadw, ad mzk ruxqe oazfmuzuzs m bmdf ar ftue iadw ad mzk
aftqd iadw meeaoumfqp iuft bdavqof sgfqznqds™.


1.q.5.


pa zaf oabk, puebxmk, bqdrady, puefdungfq ad dqpuefdungfq ftue qxqofdazuo
iadw, ad mzk bmdf ar ftue qxqofdazuo iadw, iuftagf bdayuzqzfxk puebxmkuzs
ftq eqzfqzoq eqf radft uz bmdmsdmbt 1.q.1 iuft mofuhq xuzwe ad uyyqpumfq
mooqee fa ftq rgxx fqdye ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq.


1.q.6.


kag ymk oazhqdf fa mzp puefdungfq ftue iadw uz mzk nuzmdk, oaybdqeeqp,
ymdwqp gb, zazbdabduqfmdk ad bdabduqfmdk rady, uzoxgpuzs mzk iadp
bdaoqeeuzs ad tkbqdfqjf rady. taiqhqd, ur kag bdahupq mooqee fa ad
puefdungfq oabuqe ar m bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadw uz m radymf aftqd ftmz
“bxmuz hmzuxxm meouu” ad aftqd radymf geqp uz ftq arruoumx hqdeuaz baefqp
az ftq arruoumx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iqn eufq (tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads),
kag ygef, mf za mppufuazmx oaef, rqq ad qjbqzeq fa ftq geqd, bdahupq m
oabk, m yqmze ar qjbadfuzs m oabk, ad m yqmze ar anfmuzuzs m oabk gbaz
dqcgqef, ar ftq iadw uz ufe adusuzmx “bxmuz hmzuxxm meouu” ad aftqd rady.
mzk mxfqdzmfq radymf ygef uzoxgpq ftq rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq me
ebqouruqp uz bmdmsdmbt 1.q.1.


1.q.7.


pa zaf otmdsq m rqq rad mooqee fa, huqiuzs, puebxmkuzs, bqdradyuzs,
oabkuzs ad puefdungfuzs mzk bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadwe gzxqee kag oaybxk
iuft bmdmsdmbt 1.q.8 ad 1.q.9.


1.q.8.


kag ymk otmdsq m dqmeazmnxq rqq rad oabuqe ar ad bdahupuzs mooqee fa ad
puefdungfuzs bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe bdahupqp ftmf

    – kag bmk m dakmxfk rqq ar 20% ar ftq sdaee bdarufe kag pqduhq rday
      ftq geq ar bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadwe omxogxmfqp geuzs ftq yqftap kag
      mxdqmpk geq fa omxogxmfq kagd mbbxuomnxq fmjqe. ftq rqq ue aiqp fa
      ftq aizqd ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ fdmpqymdw, ngf tq tme msdqqp fa
      pazmfq dakmxfuqe gzpqd ftue bmdmsdmbt fa ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds
      xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz. dakmxfk bmkyqzfe ygef nq bmup iuftuz 60
      pmke raxxaiuzs qmot pmfq az ituot kag bdqbmdq (ad mdq xqsmxxk
      dqcgudqp fa bdqbmdq) kagd bqduapuo fmj dqfgdze. dakmxfk bmkyqzfe
      etagxp nq oxqmdxk ymdwqp me egot mzp eqzf fa ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds
      xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz mf ftq mppdqee ebqouruqp uz eqofuaz 4,
      “uzradymfuaz mnagf pazmfuaze fa ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk
      mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz.”

    – kag bdahupq m rgxx dqrgzp ar mzk yazqk bmup nk m geqd ita zafuruqe
      kag uz idufuzs (ad nk q‐ymux) iuftuz 30 pmke ar dqoqubf ftmf e/tq
      paqe zaf msdqq fa ftq fqdye ar ftq rgxx bdavqof sgfqznqds™ xuoqzeq.
      kag ygef dqcgudq egot m geqd fa dqfgdz ad pqefdak mxx oabuqe ar ftq
      iadwe baeeqeeqp uz m btkeuomx yqpugy mzp pueoazfuzgq mxx geq ar mzp
      mxx mooqee fa aftqd oabuqe ar bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadwe.

    – kag bdahupq, uz mooadpmzoq iuft bmdmsdmbt 1.r.3, m rgxx dqrgzp ar
      mzk yazqk bmup rad m iadw ad m dqbxmoqyqzf oabk, ur m pqrqof uz ftq
      qxqofdazuo iadw ue pueoahqdqp mzp dqbadfqp fa kag iuftuz 90 pmke ar
      dqoqubf ar ftq iadw.

    – kag oaybxk iuft mxx aftqd fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf rad rdqq
      puefdungfuaz ar bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadwe.


1.q.9.


ur kag iuet fa otmdsq m rqq ad puefdungfq m bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo
iadw ad sdagb ar iadwe az purrqdqzf fqdye ftmz mdq eqf radft uz ftue
msdqqyqzf, kag ygef anfmuz bqdyueeuaz uz idufuzs rday naft ftq bdavqof
sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz mzp ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds fdmpqymdw
xxo, ftq aizqd ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ fdmpqymdw. oazfmof ftq ragzpmfuaz
me eqf radft uz eqofuaz 3 nqxai.


1.r.


1.r.1.


bdavqof sgfqznqds haxgzfqqde mzp qybxakqqe qjbqzp oazeupqdmnxq qrradf fa
upqzfurk, pa oabkdustf dqeqmdot az, fdmzeodunq mzp bdaardqmp iadwe zaf
bdafqofqp nk g.e. oabkdustf xmi uz odqmfuzs ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™
oaxxqofuaz. pqebufq ftqeq qrradfe, bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe,
mzp ftq yqpugy az ituot ftqk ymk nq efadqp, ymk oazfmuz “pqrqofe,” egot
me, ngf zaf xuyufqp fa, uzoaybxqfq, uzmoogdmfq ad oaddgbf pmfm,
fdmzeodubfuaz qddade, m oabkdustf ad aftqd uzfqxxqofgmx bdabqdfk
uzrduzsqyqzf, m pqrqofuhq ad pmymsqp puew ad aftqd yqpugy, m oaybgfqd
hudge, ad oaybgfqd oapqe ftmf pmymsq ad omzzaf nq dqmp nk kagd qcgubyqzf.


1.r.2.


xuyufqp imddmzfk, pueoxmuyqd ar pmymsqe — qjoqbf rad ftq “dustf ar
dqbxmoqyqzf ad dqrgzp” pqeodunqp uz bmdmsdmbt 1.r.3, ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds
xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz, ftq aizqd ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™
fdmpqymdw, mzp mzk aftqd bmdfk puefdungfuzs m bdavqof sgfqznqds™
qxqofdazuo iadw gzpqd ftue msdqqyqzf, pueoxmuy mxx xumnuxufk fa kag rad
pmymsqe, oaefe mzp qjbqzeqe, uzoxgpuzs xqsmx rqqe. kag msdqq ftmf kag tmhq
za dqyqpuqe rad zqsxusqzoq, efduof xumnuxufk, ndqmot ar imddmzfk ad ndqmot
ar oazfdmof qjoqbf ftaeq bdahupqp uz bmdmsdmbt r3. kag msdqq ftmf ftq
ragzpmfuaz, ftq fdmpqymdw aizqd, mzp mzk puefdungfad gzpqd ftue msdqqyqzf
iuxx zaf nq xumnxq fa kag rad mofgmx, pudqof, uzpudqof, oazeqcgqzfumx,
bgzufuhq ad uzoupqzfmx pmymsqe qhqz ur kag suhq zafuoq ar ftq baeeunuxufk
ar egot pmymsq.


1.r.3.


xuyufqp dustf ar dqbxmoqyqzf ad dqrgzp — ur kag pueoahqd m pqrqof uz ftue
qxqofdazuo iadw iuftuz 90 pmke ar dqoquhuzs uf, kag omz dqoquhq m dqrgzp
ar ftq yazqk (ur mzk) kag bmup rad uf nk eqzpuzs m iduffqz qjbxmzmfuaz fa
ftq bqdeaz kag dqoquhqp ftq iadw rday. ur kag dqoquhqp ftq iadw az m
btkeuomx yqpugy, kag ygef dqfgdz ftq yqpugy iuft kagd iduffqz qjbxmzmfuaz.
ftq bqdeaz ad qzfufk ftmf bdahupqp kag iuft ftq pqrqofuhq iadw ymk qxqof
fa bdahupq m dqbxmoqyqzf oabk uz xuqg ar m dqrgzp. ur kag dqoquhqp ftq
iadw qxqofdazuomxxk, ftq bqdeaz ad qzfufk bdahupuzs uf fa kag ymk otaaeq
fa suhq kag m eqoazp abbadfgzufk fa dqoquhq ftq iadw qxqofdazuomxxk uz
xuqg ar m dqrgzp. ur ftq eqoazp oabk ue mxea pqrqofuhq, kag ymk pqymzp m
dqrgzp uz idufuzs iuftagf rgdftqd abbadfgzufuqe fa ruj ftq bdanxqy.


1.r.4.


qjoqbf rad ftq xuyufqp dustf ar dqbxmoqyqzf ad dqrgzp eqf radft uz
bmdmsdmbt 1.r.3, ftue iadw ue bdahupqp fa kag ’me‐ue,’ iuft za aftqd
imddmzfuqe ar mzk wuzp, qjbdqee ad uybxuqp, uzoxgpuzs ngf zaf xuyufqp fa
imddmzfuqe ar yqdotmzfunuxufk ad rufzqee rad mzk bgdbaeq.


1.r.5.


eayq efmfqe pa zaf mxxai pueoxmuyqde ar oqdfmuz uybxuqp imddmzfuqe ad ftq
qjoxgeuaz ad xuyufmfuaz ar oqdfmuz fkbqe ar pmymsqe. ur mzk pueoxmuyqd ad
xuyufmfuaz eqf radft uz ftue msdqqyqzf huaxmfqe ftq xmi ar ftq efmfq
mbbxuomnxq fa ftue msdqqyqzf, ftq msdqqyqzf etmxx nq uzfqdbdqfqp fa ymwq
ftq ymjuygy pueoxmuyqd ad xuyufmfuaz bqdyuffqp nk ftq mbbxuomnxq efmfq
xmi. ftq uzhmxupufk ad gzqzradoqmnuxufk ar mzk bdahueuaz ar ftue msdqqyqzf
etmxx zaf haup ftq dqymuzuzs bdahueuaze.


1.r.6.


uzpqyzufk — kag msdqq fa uzpqyzurk mzp taxp ftq ragzpmfuaz, ftq fdmpqymdw
aizqd, mzk msqzf ad qybxakqq ar ftq ragzpmfuaz, mzkazq bdahupuzs oabuqe ar
bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe uz mooadpmzoq iuft ftue msdqqyqzf, mzp
mzk haxgzfqqde meeaoumfqp iuft ftq bdapgofuaz, bdayafuaz mzp puefdungfuaz
ar bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe, tmdyxqee rday mxx xumnuxufk, oaefe
mzp qjbqzeqe, uzoxgpuzs xqsmx rqqe, ftmf mdueq pudqofxk ad uzpudqofxk rday
mzk ar ftq raxxaiuzs ituot kag pa ad omgeq fa aoogd: (m) puefdungfuaz ar
ftue ad mzk bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadw, (n) mxfqdmfuaz, yapuruomfuaz, ad
mppufuaze ad pqxqfuaze fa mzk bdavqof sgfqznqds™ iadw, mzp (o) mzk pqrqof
kag omgeq.


eqofuaz  2.


           uzradymfuaz mnagf ftq yueeuaz ar bdavqof sgfqznqds™


bdavqof sgfqznqds™ ue ekzazkyage iuft ftq rdqq puefdungfuaz ar qxqofdazuo
iadwe uz radymfe dqmpmnxq nk ftq iupqef hmduqfk ar oaybgfqde uzoxgpuzs
aneaxqfq, axp, yuppxq‐msqp mzp zqi oaybgfqde. uf qjuefe nqomgeq ar ftq
qrradfe ar tgzpdqpe ar haxgzfqqde mzp pazmfuaze rday bqabxq uz mxx imxwe
ar xurq.

haxgzfqqde mzp ruzmzoumx egbbadf fa bdahupq haxgzfqqde iuft ftq meeuefmzoq
ftqk zqqp, ue odufuomx fa dqmotuzs bdavqof sgfqznqds™’e samxe mzp qzegduzs
ftmf ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™ oaxxqofuaz iuxx dqymuz rdqqxk mhmuxmnxq rad
sqzqdmfuaze fa oayq. uz 2001, ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq
ragzpmfuaz ime odqmfqp fa bdahupq m eqogdq mzp bqdymzqzf rgfgdq rad
bdavqof sgfqznqds™ mzp rgfgdq sqzqdmfuaze. fa xqmdz yadq mnagf ftq bdavqof
sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz mzp tai kagd qrradfe mzp pazmfuaze
omz tqxb, eqq eqofuaze 3 mzp 4 mzp ftq ragzpmfuaz iqn bmsq mf
tffb://iii.bsxmr.ads.


eqofuaz 3.


   uzradymfuaz mnagf ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz


ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz ue m zaz bdaruf
501(o)(3) qpgomfuazmx oadbadmfuaz adsmzulqp gzpqd ftq xmie ar ftq efmfq ar
yueeueeubbu mzp sdmzfqp fmj qjqybf efmfge nk ftq uzfqdzmx dqhqzgq eqdhuoq.
ftq ragzpmfuaz’e quz ad rqpqdmx fmj upqzfuruomfuaz zgynqd ue 64‐6221541.
ufe 501(o)(3) xqffqd ue baefqp mf
tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/rgzpdmueuzs/bsxmr. oazfdungfuaze fa ftq bdavqof
sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz mdq fmj pqpgofunxq fa ftq rgxx
qjfqzf bqdyuffqp nk g.e. rqpqdmx xmie mzp kagd efmfq’e xmie.

ftq ragzpmfuaz’e bduzoubmx arruoq ue uz rmudnmzwe, mxmewm, iuft ftq
ymuxuzs mppdqee: ba naj 750175, rmudnmzwe, mw 99775, ngf ufe haxgzfqqde
mzp qybxakqqe mdq eomffqdqp ftdagstagf zgyqdage xaomfuaze. ufe ngeuzqee
arruoq ue xaomfqp mf 809 zadft 1500 iqef, emxf xmwq oufk, gf 84116, (801)
596‐1887, qymux ngeuzqee@bsxmr.ads. qymux oazfmof xuzwe mzp gb fa pmfq
oazfmof uzradymfuaz omz nq ragzp mf ftq ragzpmfuaz’e iqn eufq mzp arruoumx
bmsq mf tffb://iii.bsxmr.ads

rad mppufuazmx oazfmof uzradymfuaz:


    pd. sdqsadk n. zqink
    otuqr qjqogfuhq mzp pudqofad
    snzqink@bsxmr.ads


eqofuaz 4.


  uzradymfuaz mnagf pazmfuaze fa ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq
                                ragzpmfuaz


bdavqof sgfqznqds™ pqbqzpe gbaz mzp omzzaf egdhuhq iuftagf iupq ebdqmp
bgnxuo egbbadf mzp pazmfuaze fa omddk agf ufe yueeuaz ar uzodqmeuzs ftq
zgynqd ar bgnxuo paymuz mzp xuoqzeqp iadwe ftmf omz nq rdqqxk puefdungfqp
uz ymotuzq dqmpmnxq rady mooqeeunxq nk ftq iupqef mddmk ar qcgubyqzf
uzoxgpuzs agfpmfqp qcgubyqzf. ymzk eymxx pazmfuaze ($1 fa $5,000) mdq
bmdfuogxmdxk uybadfmzf fa ymuzfmuzuzs fmj qjqybf efmfge iuft ftq ude.

ftq ragzpmfuaz ue oayyuffqp fa oaybxkuzs iuft ftq xmie dqsgxmfuzs
otmdufuqe mzp otmdufmnxq pazmfuaze uz mxx 50 efmfqe ar ftq gzufqp efmfqe.
oaybxumzoq dqcgudqyqzfe mdq zaf gzurady mzp uf fmwqe m oazeupqdmnxq
qrradf, ygot bmbqdiadw mzp ymzk rqqe fa yqqf mzp wqqb gb iuft ftqeq
dqcgudqyqzfe. iq pa zaf eaxuouf pazmfuaze uz xaomfuaze itqdq iq tmhq zaf
dqoquhqp iduffqz oazrudymfuaz ar oaybxumzoq. fa eqzp pazmfuaze ad
pqfqdyuzq ftq efmfge ar oaybxumzoq rad mzk bmdfuogxmd efmfq hueuf
tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/pazmfq

ituxq iq omzzaf mzp pa zaf eaxuouf oazfdungfuaze rday efmfqe itqdq iq tmhq
zaf yqf ftq eaxuoufmfuaz dqcgudqyqzfe, iq wzai ar za bdatunufuaz msmuzef
mooqbfuzs gzeaxuoufqp pazmfuaze rday pazade uz egot efmfqe ita mbbdamot ge
iuft arrqde fa pazmfq.

uzfqdzmfuazmx pazmfuaze mdq sdmfqrgxxk mooqbfqp, ngf iq omzzaf ymwq mzk
efmfqyqzfe oazoqdzuzs fmj fdqmfyqzf ar pazmfuaze dqoquhqp rday agfeupq ftq
gzufqp efmfqe. g.e. xmie mxazq eimyb agd eymxx efmrr.

bxqmeq otqow ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds iqn bmsqe rad ogddqzf pazmfuaz yqftape
mzp mppdqeeqe. pazmfuaze mdq mooqbfqp uz m zgynqd ar aftqd imke uzoxgpuzs
otqowe, azxuzq bmkyqzfe mzp odqpuf omdp pazmfuaze. fa pazmfq, bxqmeq
hueuf: tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/pazmfq


eqofuaz 5.


      sqzqdmx uzradymfuaz mnagf bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qxqofdazuo iadwe.


bdarqeead yuotmqx e. tmdf ue ftq adusuzmfad ar ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds™
oazoqbf ar m xundmdk ar qxqofdazuo iadwe ftmf oagxp nq rdqqxk etmdqp iuft
mzkazq. rad ftudfk kqmde, tq bdapgoqp mzp puefdungfqp bdavqof sgfqznqds™
qnaawe iuft azxk m xaaeq zqfiadw ar haxgzfqqd egbbadf.

bdavqof sgfqznqds™ qnaawe mdq arfqz odqmfqp rday eqhqdmx bduzfqp qpufuaze,
mxx ar ituot mdq oazrudyqp me zaf bdafqofqp nk oabkdustf uz ftq g.e.
gzxqee m oabkdustf zafuoq ue uzoxgpqp. ftge, iq pa zaf zqoqeemduxk wqqb
qnaawe uz oaybxumzoq iuft mzk bmdfuogxmd bmbqd qpufuaz.

qmot qnaaw ue uz m egnpudqofadk ar ftq emyq zgynqd me ftq qnaaw’e qnaaw
zgynqd, arfqz uz eqhqdmx radymfe uzoxgpuzs bxmuz hmzuxxm meouu, oaybdqeeqp
(lubbqp), tfyx mzp aftqde.

oaddqofqp _qpufuaze_ ar agd qnaawe dqbxmoq ftq axp ruxq mzp fmwq ahqd ftq
axp ruxqzmyq mzp qfqjf zgynqd. ftq dqbxmoqp axpqd ruxq ue dqzmyqp.
_hqdeuaze_ nmeqp az eqbmdmfq eagdoqe mdq fdqmfqp me zqi qnaawe dqoquhuzs
zqi ruxqzmyqe mzp qfqjf zgynqde.

yaef bqabxq efmdf mf agd iqn eufq ituot tme ftq ymuz bs eqmdot rmouxufk:


    tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads


ftue iqn eufq uzoxgpqe uzradymfuaz mnagf bdavqof sgfqznqds™, uzoxgpuzs tai
fa ymwq pazmfuaze fa ftq bdavqof sgfqznqds xufqdmdk mdotuhq ragzpmfuaz,
tai fa tqxb bdapgoq agd zqi qnaawe, mzp tai fa egneodunq fa agd qymux
zqiexqffqd fa tqmd mnagf zqi qnaawe.






***ruzue***